Close Search About Us Everyday Care Main Menu CareClub Know Your Pet Breed Information Press Center Main Menu Press Center Events Careers Shop Explore Shop Main Menu Explore Shop All Products All Products Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Dogs For Dogs Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Cats For Cats Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets Find Care Welcome to Existing Account Already have a myVCA account? Log in 24/7 to access your pet’s health care information. Log In Now Activate Your Account Looking for a convenient way to access your pet’s health records, refill prescriptions, view upcoming appointments and more? Set up your myVCA account today. Activate Account Find Care myVCA Search Shopping Cart × Search Home Know Your Pet Feeding Times And Frequency For Your Dog Feeding Times and Frequency for Your Dog By Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Robin Downing, DVM, CVPP, CCRP, DAAPM Print Article I've heard conflicting advice about feeding my dog - once a day, twice a day, just keep the bowl filled. I'm confused! What is a good feeding schedule?Feeding your dog does not have to be mysterious. By recognizing a few key concepts and attributes of dogs we can create a very reasonable feeding plan for them. Dogs are creatures of habit. We can use this fact to our advantage by creating a regular feeding schedule and sticking to it. A regular feeding schedule helps with house training puppies, as well as adult rescue dogs who have not been taught household manners. Puppies generally need to relieve themselves within 10 to 15 minutes of eating a meal. By linking a 'potty stop' with a meal we not only allow ourselves to predict when the pup needs a trip outside, we allow the puppy to learn to associate the urges to urinate and defecate with being in the appropriate location. This is a very important step in the house-training process. Feeding an adult dog at regular times provides the security and predictability of a routine. Meals become a cornerstone event of the day around which other activities are added. A feeding routine helps your dog cope when there are changes in the household (e.g., a child moves away to college, a new baby arrives, or a vacation during which a house-sitter is in charge). "A feeding routine helps your dog cope when there are changes in the household." A feeding routine makes a necessary food change easier. When your dog is used to eating at the same times each day, his body becomes conditioned to expect food at those times. Hunger can be a great motivator! If the stage is set for increased hunger followed by meals at regular times, then transitioning to a new food will often be seamless and straightforward. Dogs have a simple stomach anatomy, just like humans. Because dogs have a simple stomach structure, once the stomach is filled with food, it will empty within a few hours as food moves into the small intestine. After 8 to 10 hours, an empty stomach begins to send signals to the brain stimulating a hunger response. For this reason, at least two meals per day are best for your dog. Imagine if you only got to eat breakfast each day, and that was it! Regular, routine feeding times allow your dog's body to be prepared for the food it will receive. It is not recommended to keep the bowl filled and allow grazing. A break in eating habits can be a warning sign of illness. When dogs eat on a regular schedule, that habit becomes strong. It is easy to see at a glance if all the food from a meal is consumed. If food is left, whether all or part of a meal, that is an important signal that something is wrong, and it is time to schedule a veterinary appointment. I was told that puppies should eat all they want; 3 or 4 times per day. Is that true?Feeding a puppy all it can eat at one time is called 'ad libitum' or 'free choice' feeding. This is not recommended as it can create juvenile obesity, binge eaters, as well as set the stage for some orthopedic problems and diabetes. Over-eating at any one meal can also cause stomach discomfort and bloating causing slower digestion. Dogs are acknowledged to have a genetically determined "set point" for their adult size. Slower, controlled growth in puppies optimizes body condition in adulthood. How many meals should my dog eat each day?The number of meals a dog eats per day depends completely on the family schedule. Dogs should eat at least two meals each day, about 12 hours apart. But a breakfast, lunch, and dinner schedule is an equally great option. If more than 12 hours elapses between meals, the stomach can become hyperacidic causing nausea. My dog doesn’t finish her meal all at once. I think she prefers to graze. What should I do?Some dogs really can regulate their food intake fairly well. It is still a good idea to create the expectation of mealtimes. This will help make it easier if another pet is added to your family at some point in the future. For grazers, simply measure out the entire day's portion of food in the morning and offer the bowl several times throughout the day. Choose regular times in order to create the routine we know is helpful. The important thing is to use a measured portion, either with a measuring cup or a kitchen scale, for the day. "The important thing is to use a measured portion for the day." Another consideration is the use of food toys. Many options exist from rolling food toys that just drop out a kibble of food intermittently to stationary food toys that require the dog to work for the food. See the handout “Feeding the Mind and Body: Interactive Feeders for Dogs and Cats” for more information on these types of feeders. Food toys are almost as entertaining for the people in your family as they are for your dog! Your veterinarian remains the best source of nutritional guidance for your dog, answering important questions like what to feed, how much to feed, and how frequently to feed. Feeding time can be an important bonding time. Creating routine and regular feeding times builds fun into everyday activities. Contributors: Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Robin Downing, DVM, CVPP, CCRP, DAAPM Keywords Care & Wellness Nutrition Pet Services Find a Hospital Locate a hospital near you Learn more Related Articles VCA ANIMAL HOSPITALS About Us Contact Us Find a Hospital Location Directory Press Center Social Responsibility Career Opportunities Grow Your Hospital Sitemap Affiliate of Mars Inc. 2023 | © Copyright VCA Animal Hospitals all rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Web Accessibility | AdChoices | Cookie Notice | Cookie Settings | Your Privacy Choices 

Toggle Menu Registrations Shop Young Kennel Club Login Toggle Search Basket items Getting a dog Dog training Dog breeding Health and dog care Events and Activities About us Registrations Shop Young Kennel Club Home Health and dog care Health A to Z of health and care issues Creating healthy feeding habits Creating healthy feeding habits Giving your dog a healthy well-balanced diet can reduce their risk of a wide range of chronic diseases and can help keep their body fit and strong. A well-balanced diet is more than just what you put in their bowl, but also includes the amount you feed them and any additional snacks too. It's easy to give your dog extra food throughout the day, either as treats, table scraps or just giving them a little more at mealtimes, but doing so regularly can be damaging to their health and can make them less happy in the long run. It’s vital that you take care of what food you give to your dog and that you maintain good feeding habits that will allow them to live the healthiest and happiest life possible. Why healthy feeding habits are important Maintaining good feeding habits can help prevent your dog from becoming overweight and can contribute to your dog living a longer and healthier life. Keeping your dog lean and fit can reduce their risks of developing heart disease, diabetes and can reduce the strain on their joints and back. Choose a good quality food The type and amount of food your dog should eat will depend on a number of factors, including their age, size and how active they are. Typically, food that is high in protein and fibre, but low in fat is excellent for helping to keep your dog healthy. These foods provide dogs with adequate energy while also keeping them feeling fuller for longer. Your vet will be able to help you work out a diet that is appropriate for your dog. Don’t “guesstimate” when giving food Some of the most important aspects of having a well-balanced diet include portion control. Many owners “guesstimate” how much food to give to their dog, but this can be very unreliable, especially as we are more likely to be overgenerous and give them too much food rather than too little. You could consider measuring out your dog’s food using a cup or a scoop, but even this method may not be accurate as they can be very easy to overfill. Weigh out your food To help you know how much food your dog is eating and how many calories they are consuming each day, it is important to weigh out their food. Your vet should be able to give you a guideline on how much they should be eating each day, based on their ideal target weight. Good quality dog food will tell you how many calories each serving contains, so you can work out how much food they need to be given to maintain or reduce their weight. Some foods may give this as calories per scoop or per gram. Avoid free feeding Free feeding (leaving food out all day for a dog to graze on) is something you should avoid, especially if you are trying to help your dog lose weight. Dogs that have food constantly available to them are likely to eat more food than those fed fixed amounts at regular times each day. You know your dog best and if you are used to free feeding and your dog is a healthy size then continue doing what is right for you. Try feeding two smaller meals in a day Dogs like routine and having meals at regular times gives them something to look forward to and makes their day more interesting. To help keep your dog in shape, you could consider feeding them two or more smaller meals throughout the day. By feeding them regularly it prevents them from eating too quickly, which improves digestion, stops them swallowing lots of air when they eat and makes them less likely to still feel hungry after they have eaten. Try not to feed them too late When working out what times you should regularly feed your dog, make sure that you don’t feed them too late, as they will not burn many calories when sleeping at night. Late-night feeding can easily lead to weight gain. Give treats sensibly When giving your dog treats watch what you give them and how often. Make sure treats are not high in fat or sugar. Some appropriate snacks include carrot sticks, or a small piece of cucumber, apple or banana When giving treats, make sure you include them in your dog’s total daily calorie intake. Taking the calories your dog eats in treats from the calorie allowance of their meals is a good way to balance things out You could put some of your dog’s kibble allowance aside and use that as treats during the day Think about your dog’s daily calorie intake It’s important that you divide your dog’s total calorie intake for the day between each meal so that you are not overfeeding them. If you like to give them treats, make sure that you assign a certain amount of their calories for these before working out how much to give them for each meal. Avoid giving table scraps Do you, or your family, have a habit of giving your dog food from their plate, or sneaking them food under the table? If so, it will probably make your dog happy, but feeding table scraps and other fatty treats may encourage many pets to overeat and gain excessive weight. If you cannot resist giving table scraps, make sure they are something healthy, e.g. raw carrots or rice cakes. If your dog often begs for food scraps, you could consider feeding them before you cook or eat so they are not hungry. Avoid giving some human foods Some things that humans eat are not always appropriate for dogs. Foods such as grapes, raisins, onions, chocolate and some artificial sweeteners can be poisonous to dogs. Table scraps are also often fatty and high in calories, which will not help your dog lose weight and may upset their stomach. Find out about other foods that are poisonous to dogs. Make eating more fun Toys that slowly release food when they are moved around, or played with, are an excellent way to help your dog draw out meal times so that they do not gobble down their food too quickly. This means they will be more satisfied with less food. These toys, available from most pet shops, are also a great form of mental stimulation that your dogs will love to play with. Discourage your dog from begging Begging for food is something that comes naturally to most dogs and can be something that is incredibly difficult to resist. Although it can be a sign that your dog is hungry, it may not always be the case. If your dog regularly begs for food, you could: Offer them some fresh water - sometimes quenching their thirst may distract them Take them for a walk, as this may help to take their mind off food Give them a healthy snack, such as carrot sticks or slices of apple. Alternatively, you could give them a small amount of kibble, but make sure if you give any treats these are taken into consideration when calculating your dog’s total calorie intake for the day Give them some attention, such as petting them or playing with them Give them small meals throughout the day to keep them feeling full Time your dog’s meal so that you feed them before you prepare your own meal or before you eat Give them plenty of encouragement Although many people think of dogs as eating pretty much anything, in reality some dogs might actually be quite fussy about what they eat from their bowls. If your dog is a “fussy eater” try to encourage them to eat their food and ignore their begging. Give them lots of praise for eating their own food from their bowl. You could also try: Restricting access to sneaky snacks, including human food from your plate Limiting their treats to training tools only Making your dog’s food more appealing Being persistent and consistent with your approach to feeding Switching to another type of food Read more about feeding a fussy eater. Get your whole family involved Dogs can sometimes receive small amounts of treats from a number of family members. If everyone in a large family is giving them a treat it can all add up and be enough to fill them up. In houses where more than one person feeds the dog, it can be more of a challenge to know how much food your dog has had in a day. Where possible, one adult should be responsible for all the feeding, but if this is not realistic, then you may wish to create a set of feeding instructions and records so that each person who feeds the dog notes down on a homemade chart how much they have given, what type of food and when. Alternatively, you could weigh out each of your dog’s meals at the beginning of each day and store them in labelled, sealable containers. This way everyone will know how much the dog has been fed and how much is left for the day. Ensure your dog always has access to water Giving your dog access to plenty of fresh water at all times throughout the day will keep them hydrated, help regulate their body temperature and will aid with digestion. Be active Regular exercise, whether it’s walking or other activities are vitally important to build into your dog’s day. It keeps them fit, builds strong bones, tones up muscles, burns excess energy and helps them maintain a healthy weight. Avoid feeding immediately before or after exercise, and allow an hour to pass between feeding and activity. Speak to your vet If you’re concerned that you’re feeding your dog too much, or not enough then it’s always a good idea to call your local veterinary practice for advice. Similarly, if you’re concerned that your dog’s feeding behaviour has changed or that your dog is displaying signs that you are concerned about then call your vet straight away. Article author Content provided by PRO PLAN, The Kennel Club’s partner in dog nutrition. Think your dog may be affected? If you're worried about your dog's health, always contact your vet immediately! We're not a veterinary organisation and so we can't give veterinary advice, but if you're worried about any of the issues raised in this article, please contact your local vet practice for further information. Find a vet near you If you're looking for a vet practice near you, why not visit the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons' Find a vet page. Back to top TheKennelClubUK on Facebook TheKennelClubUK on Instagram TheKennelClubUK on Twitter TheKennelClubUK on YouTube Media Media Centre Campaigns About us About The Kennel Club Contact us/help centre Job opportunities Our facilities Registration and services The Kennel Club Pet Insurance Petlog Charity work The Kennel Club Charitable Trust The Kennel Club Educational Trust The Kennel Club Arts Foundation Events Crufts Discover Dogs All other events Event Terms & Conditions Policies Child protection policy Safeguarding policy Accessibility Policy Copyright © The Kennel Club Limited 2023. The unauthorised reproduction of text and images is strictly prohibited. Privacy policy Cookie policy Terms & conditions Search The Kennel Club Go 

Menu Menu Royal Canin, Health Nutrition for Cats and Dogs Account Log in Create an account Forgot Password Select Language Search Search Start typing to search Close Scientific Practice Management Issues Vet Symposium Authors About Vet Focus Close Worldwide medical and scientific journal for animal health professionals SCIENTIFIC Back SCIENTIFIC View all scientific articles Dermatology Gastro intestinal tract Health management Urinary Vital support Weight management PRACTICE MANAGEMENT Back PRACTICE MANAGEMENT View all practice management articles ISSUES Back ISSUES All issues Regular issues Special practice management issues Special clinical issues VET SYMPOSIUM Back VET SYMPOSIUM Practice Management 2020 Scientific 2020 Practice Management 2019 Scientific 2019 AUTHORS Back AUTHORS ABOUT VET FOCUS Back ABOUT VET FOCUS Select Language Log in Create an account Download Acrobat Reader Home Scientific Canine feeding behavior Home Scientific Canine feeding behavior Issue number 24.3 Behavior Canine feeding behavior Published 04/03/2021 Written by Jon Bowen Also available in Français , Deutsch , Italiano and Español Two trends appear to have become fashionable amongst dog owners in recent years: Natural feeding: Feeding of diets that are based on the composition of wild wolf diets, often including raw ingredients. Dominance-based training methods: The use of gestures of dominance, such as feeding order or restriction of privileges, to establish control based on increased owner status as a pack leader rather than through reinforcement of desirable behaviors using food rewards. Key points The diet of modern wolves should not be used as an absolute template for the composition of domestic dog diets, but instead their feeding behavior provides an indication of the needs of domestic dogs. Dogs are highly motivated to forage and work to get food, but these needs are rarely met in a domestic setting, which can lead to behavioral problems. The relationship between dogs and people should be established using feeding and training with food rewards rather than traditional methods based on concepts of dominance. Prevention of behavioral problems is closely associated with the use of food rewards during training. Introduction Two trends appear to have become fashionable amongst dog owners in recent years: Natural feeding: Feeding of diets that are based on the composition of wild wolf diets, often including raw ingredients. Dominance-based training methods: The use of gestures of dominance, such as feeding order or restriction of privileges, to establish control based on increased owner status as a pack leader rather than through reinforcement of desirable behaviors using food rewards. Both trends are rooted in a popular return to a naturalistic view of dogs, but share the common weakness that they do not take into account the impact that the presence of humans has had on domestic dogs and wolves. This article will provide an overview of the feeding behavior and preferences of wolves and dogs, and provide an indication of how a better understanding of this subject can lead to fewer health and behavioral problems in domestic dogs. The relationship between people and dogs The history of the relationship between people and dogs is a long one. Homo sapiens is thought to have emerged in Africa approximately 250,000 years ago, after a period of increasing skull expansion in early hominid species which began 150,000 years earlier. Although there is evidence of gradual development of tool use and cultural advancement in our species throughout its history, there appears to have been a surge in cultural development which culminated in “behavioral modernity” approximately 50,000 years ago; namely the presence of symbolic culture, language and specialized technology, which contain all of the elements recognizable in subsequent civilizations, including the keeping of animals (Figure 1). Figure 1. A brief summary of human association with the domestic dog. Figure 1. A brief summary of human association with the domestic dog. The ancestor of the domestic dog is Canis lupus (the grey wolf), which became a species separate from the coyote approximately 1-2 million years ago. The geographic origin of the domestic dog remains controversial. Genetic studies have pointed to an origin in South-East Asia, the Middle East or South-East China 1 2 3, with a possibility of genetic divergence from the wolf beginning up to 100,000 years ago. However, the most recently published analysis of the mitochondrial DNA of prehistoric canids and modern dogs suggests that domestication began 18,800-32,100 years ago 4. The earliest accepted archaeological evidence of canine domestication is the 33,000-year-old remains of a dog found in Siberia in 2010 5, which was subsequently found to be more closely related genetically to the modern domestic dog than the wolf 6. In general, the genetic and archaeological evidence indicates that while there may have been some association between our species early in the history of Homo sapiens, dogs only began to undergo the process of domestication in the era of human behavioral modernity (Figure 2). This is significant, because it means that the dog would have been present prior to, and throughout, the development of agriculture. It would therefore have been part of human communities during the development of the most fundamental aspects of human culture relating to the preparation and consumption of food. From the very beginning of its association with humans, the domestic dog’s diet and feeding habits would have been heavily influenced by the practices and expectations of people. Figure 2. A 7,000-year-old rock painting from Tassili N’Ajjer, Algeria, depicting humans hunting with dogs that show physical traits that differentiate them from wolves and other wild canids. © Shutterstock Figure 2. A 7,000-year-old rock painting from Tassili N’Ajjer, Algeria, depicting humans hunting with dogs that show physical traits that differentiate them from wolves and other wild canids. © Shutterstock The wolf (Canis lupus) Diet The behavior of modern wolves is often referred to as the basis for understanding the behavior of domestic dogs. While there is a lot to be gained from this, the modern wolf is in fact as much the product of the influence of humans as the domestic dog is, and this may be particularly true with respect to diet. The wolf was once one of the most widely distributed mammals, living throughout the northern hemisphere. In the areas where it continues to survive, its dietary range includes other mammals (ranging in size from small mammals to large ungulates), snakes, reptiles, birds and their eggs, fish, primates, carrion, berries, vegetables and fruit. Having such a wide range of potential food sources, wolves have a number of food-competitors, including coyotes, jackals, foxes and bears. Being bigger and better organized group hunters than many of their competitors, wolves are more successful predators of large ungulates, and hence we see a predomination of moose, deer, bison and caribou in the diet of modern wolves. This has given rise to a perception that this is the natural diet of wolves, and that they and domestic dogs are almost pure carnivores. With the development of agriculture, humans began to enclose and cultivate land, keep animals and drive away predators and pests. The expansion of agriculture, human settlements and trading routes would have had a progressively limiting effect on the range of habitats available to wolves, thereby also restricting their diet 7. This change was relatively rapid, within less than 2% of the history of the species (Figure 3). Now confined to a range that is less than half the size it once was, and to areas are generally less supportive of human habitation, the modern wolf is presented with a very different range of foraging opportunities which may not be representative of its past. So although modern wolves predominantly hunt large ungulates, this may be the result of choice restriction and competition with other species. This idea is supported by aspects of the wolf’s anatomy; for example, its dentition is similar to that of that jackal, which is omnivorous 7 8. Figure 3. Modern wolves share a common ancestry with the domestic dog, but their hunting range and behavior may have been significantly altered by the threat from humans. © Shutterstock Figure 3. Modern wolves share a common ancestry with the domestic dog, but their hunting range and behavior may have been significantly altered by the threat from humans. © Shutterstock The current dietary range and dentition of wolves suggest that they may be best classified as facultative carnivores; the bulk of their preferred diet is animal flesh, supplemented with plant material, but they can subsist on an entirely non-animal diet. However, prior to human persecution, their dietary habits may have been more varied and omnivorous. The intrinsic flexibility of this omnivorous nature would have been an advantage during and after domestication, when the dog’s diet would have contained little protein, ultimately leading to the permanent adaptation to a carbohydrate-rich diet which has been observed in genomic studies of the domestic dog 9. Hunting and feeding When hunting large ungulates, wolves operate as a cooperative group with only two or three wolves actually participating in the killing 10. The rest will be involved in a variety of roles including breaking a selected individual away from its herd, running it down, or keeping other members of the herd away whilst it is being hunted. In areas where wolves currently depend on elk as a food source, each wolf typically catches one or two elk per month, depending on season, but they have been observed to survive on scavenged food alone for periods of up to 10 weeks 10. Wolves are therefore adapted to a “feast or famine” foraging pattern, in which there may be long periods without a successful hunt. If a hunt is successful, all members of the group seek to gain a share of the carcass. It is important that the sharing of the carcass does not result in injury to group members, for two reasons. Firstly, the ability of the group to continue hunting depends on the fitness of all of its members. Secondly, the members of wolf groups are often related, so there is a genetic basis for altruism; sharing food with close relatives increases the probability of a proportion of an individual’s own genes being passed to future generations. Feeding order is not only affected by the relative status and role of individuals in the group, but also an individual’s need for food. Juvenile animals are not involved in the process for competing on a hierarchical basis for food. Wolves have therefore evolved systems of communication and competitor evaluation that enable them to deal with very difficult situations of competition between group members that prevent serious injury. Foraging in itself is a highly motivated behavior, independent of the need to obtain food. This has been confirmed by the phenomenon of “contrafreeloading” which has been observed in a wide range of wild and laboratory animal species, including wild canids 11 12. “Contrafreeloading” occurs when an individual chooses to work to gain access to food that is also available for free –it appears that in most species it is preferable to perform an operant response in order to gain food reinforcement, rather than simply to consume the food (Figure 4). Figure 4. Operant response. An operant response involves learning about the outcome associated with different behaviors. The discriminative stimulus (DS) is a sound, object, event or command that signifies to the animal that a change in its behavior could lead to a positive outcome (or avoid a negative outcome). Reinforced behaviors are expressed with greater frequency in the future. “Contrafreeloading”* suggests that the need to perform operant responses to get food reinforcement is more valuable to the animal than the food alone. * “Contrafreeloading” is the term coined to describe the finding that many animals prefer to earn food rather than simply eating identical, but freely accessible, food. Figure 4. Operant response. An operant response involves learning about the outcome associated with different behaviors. The discriminative stimulus (DS) is a sound, object, event or command that signifies to the animal that a change in its behavior could lead to a positive outcome (or avoid a negative outcome). Reinforced behaviors are expressed with greater frequency in the future. “Contrafreeloading”* suggests that the need to perform operant responses to get food reinforcement is more valuable to the animal than the food alone. * “Contrafreeloading” is the term coined to describe the finding that many animals prefer to earn food rather than simply eating identical, but freely accessible, food. Domestication The ability of wolves to subsist on scavenged food and a non-animal diet may have been crucial to their suitability for domestication. It is not clear how this started, but two of the main theories for canine domestication are that either wolf cubs were trapped and reared, or that wolves were partially “self-domesticated” when they were attracted into human settlements by the opportunity to scavenge food. Voluntary phases of domestication may have occurred during periods of reduced prey availability, with a subsequent selective pressure in favor of animals that were bold, sociable and attracted to a diet that was composed of non-animal food. It is suggested that the main trait passed on by successful animals to their offspring was a reduction in flight threshold (the distance at which an avoidance-escape response is triggered), so that successive generations became increasingly tolerant of human proximity. The urge to contrafreeload may have provided the basis for initial interactions with people and the earliest responses to training (Figure 5); the motivation to perform an operant response for reinforcement is at the heart of dog training. Evidence from studies comparing the effectiveness of training methods based on dominance, punishment and positive reinforcement strongly suggest that positive reinforcement with food produces superior outcomes and is less stressful for the dog 13 14. It is likely that food-based training formed the basis for early human-dog interactions, because even rudimentary knowledge of wolf social behavior would have been unavailable to our early ancestors. Figure 5. “Contrafreeloading” is the basis for training, as dogs prefer to work for food even when food is otherwise available for free. © Jon Bowen Figure 5. “Contrafreeloading” is the basis for training, as dogs prefer to work for food even when food is otherwise available for free. © Jon Bowen Even with improving agricultural methods, meat or fish-based dietary protein would have been of high value to people. Trapped wolf cubs, and early domestic dogs, would have been maintained on a diet that contained only a small quantity of lower quality protein, together with scraps of human food that was mostly fat and carbohydrate. However, they would have received food on a more regular basis than wild wolves, reducing the need for competition and establishing a relationship with people based on feeding. The conflict-limiting behavior of wolves is also important for their ability to fit into human communities; domestic dogs would be intolerable as companions or working animals if they were always violently competitive over food. As domestication proceeded, and dogs started to become a part of human communities, new selection pressures would have become important. Sociability, tolerance of handling and an ability to respond to human communication would all have become increasingly important, with those animals which did not show early promise being removed from the breeding population. This selection process favored the retention of juvenile physical and behavioral characteristics into adulthood (neotenisation); for example, floppy ears, heavy loose jowls, increased playfulness, behavioral plasticity, and reduced competitiveness and aggressiveness. In a series of experiments lasting more than 50 years, it has been shown that selective breeding for friendliness in silver foxes leads to heritable changes in sociability and dependence on people, together with changes in coat color and markings that are similar to those thought to have occurred during the domestication of the dog 15 16. Selective breeding for traits that made dogs sociable and workable has had far reaching effects on their ability to relate to humans. For example, domestic dogs and human children exhibit comparable abilities to attend to and process information from human facial expressions 17. This ability is not observed in wolves when they are reared in the same manner as domestic pets. Further artificial selection has seen the enhancement of breed-specific behavior, with dogs being more specialized in certain parts of the hunting behavioral sequence, e.g., dogs that favor pointing or herding behavior. Some of these behaviors have become so enhanced that they would have a negative impact on survival and fitness if present in a wild animal. Evidence for this distortion in hunting behavior comes from studies of feral dogs, which appear incapable of co-operative hunting in the manner of wolves, and instead depend on scavenging 18. Therefore, in terms of diet and feeding behavior, the end result of a host of natural and artificial selection pressures was that domestic dogs were able to thrive on a diet that was less meat-based, be less fussy about the kind of food they would eat, accept a shift from “feast and famine” to regularly fed meals, and be less competitive over food. They traded the ability to hunt effectively as a group for being able to read and respond to emotional and communicative signals in people, and thereby develop a relationship with people that was based on feeding and reinforcement. Satiety and food preference In herbivorous and omnivorous species diet selection has been linked to mechanisms for establishing an optimal macronutrient balance. It was thought that these mechanisms were unnecessary in carnivores, as their diet was assumed to be innately balanced and invariant 19. However, the diversity of the wolf diet implies that some mechanisms for food selection do exist in this species. A recent study has shown that domestic dogs select a diet that favors an overall balance of 30% protein, 63% fat and 7% carbohydrate (with respect to metabolizable energy) 19. This is very different from the diet selected by domestic cats, which is more heavily biased toward protein (52% protein, 36% fat, 12% carbohydrate) 20, which relates to the obligate carnivorous nature of the domestic cat and the relatively higher protein:fat ratio in the small mammals (e.g., mice) that form the basis of its natural diet. In a number of studies, dogs have shown a tendency to consume food in excess of their energy requirements. When fed ad libitum and given a choice of dietary components, dogs did regulate their protein and overall energy intake, but the regulated energy level was around twice the mean daily requirement 19. This implies that dogs have inherited satiety mechanisms that are the result of adaptation to a “feast or famine” food availability in wolves. Wolves have been observed to consume as much as 10 kg of meat during the initial feeding bout after killing a large ungulate 10. It is also suggested that rapid eating may have been favored during domestication, when competition for food would have been high 7 but intraspecific and interspecific violence would not have been tolerated by humans. This has implications for weight control in dogs. Satiety is the result of a combination of hormonal and physical signals from the gastrointestinal tract that indicate that sufficient food has been consumed. In many mammals, including man, a range of hormones including ghrelin, cholecystokinin, peptide YY (PYY), oxyntomodulin, and adipokines play a role in satiation. Evidence from trials of the weight-controlling drug dirlotapide, which is thought to act through PYY, indicates that manipulation of the satiety mechanism in the dog can be effective in the treatment of obesity 21. However, it is clear that in many situations wolves continue to feed until gastric distension limits further intake. It appears that the same is true, at least in part, with dogs. High fiber levels in the diet, which lead to increased stomach distension, have been shown to increase satiety and decrease voluntary intake in the short and medium term after a meal, with an even greater effect when the diet was both high in protein and fiber 22. Such a diet has been shown to have a beneficial role in weight loss in dogs 23. Implications for domestic dogs as pets Problem prevention Proper socialization and habituation during the sensitive period (3-12 weeks of age) are generally regarded as the key to healthy behavioral development. However, knowledge of the “contrafreeloading” nature of dogs and the retention of juvenile behavior in the domestic dog indicates that the use of food rewards, and feeding in general, to train and develop a bond with puppies is the method most likely to be effective. From the known ethology of wolves and dogs, dominance-based methods will be meaningless, or even intimidating, to puppies. This is supported by evidence for a reduced rate of aggression in dogs trained using positive reinforcement with food, and an increased attentiveness toward owners who employed positive reinforcement 24 Casey RA, Loftus B, Bolster C, et al. Human directed aggression in domestic dogs (Canis familiaris): Occurrence in different contexts and risk factors. App Animal Behavior Sci 2014;152:52-63. . Training has also been shown to have generally beneficial effects such as an increase in problem-solving ability in dogs 25 Marshall-Pescini S, Valsecchi P, Petak I, et al. Does training make you smarter? The effects of training on dogs’ performance (Canis familiaris) in a problem solving task. Behavioural Proc 2008;78:449-454. ; an ability to solve problems reduces frustration and an individual’s need to act instinctively when faced with challenge or conflict. The commonest owner-directed aggression problems in dogs involve resource guarding, and many owners will be shocked when they first encounter food guarding in their young dogs. Knowledge of the competitive behavior of wolves around food, and their use of signaling to avoid fights, shows us that to some degree food guarding is normal in this species. As a result dogs should generally not be challenged over food but should be left to eat in peace. This goes against the traditional view that an owner should repeatedly challenge a dog over its food until it is willing to relinquish the food bowl. The reason is that the traditional method teaches the dog that the owner is a potential competitor, in the manner of another member of a wolf pack. It may learn to relinquish food that is of modest palatability and which is freely available, but the fact that the owner is now regarded as a competitor means that the dog may guard far more ferociously scavenged or stolen food that has not been gifted by the owner, and which is high in fat or protein. This food is not only more palatable but also important for the dog’s diet selection in favor of fat and protein. It is better to establish an association between the presence of the owner and the availability of high value food; for example, by adding small amounts of highly palatable items to the bowl while a puppy is feeding (the food offered should not exceed 10% of the daily calorie requirements). Problems with eating Such problems can include gluttony, scavenging, begging and pickiness. We should expect dogs to be gluttonous, and we can also use an understanding of their normal feeding behavior to explain problems such as pickiness. Feeding behavior often involves the rapid consumption of large amounts of food at one meal, with the main limitation being gastric distension. Scavenging is driven by a need to find supplementary sources of food in anticipation of famine periods, and begging and stealing are an extension of “contrafreeloading”. Once a dog has learned that by climbing onto a kitchen worktop it can steal and eat an entire roast dinner, it is very unlikely that this behavior can be extinguished. This general tendency toward food overconsumption by most dogs means that owners are forced to control their dog’s food intake, and to accept and take responsibility for preventing food stealing and begging. Picky eating is influenced by the same underlying mechanisms. Often, when the diet of picky eating puppies is analyzed, the animals are in fact getting more than sufficient calories, but mostly through begging for human food that is often high in fat. They refuse to eat from a bowl. This problem can therefore be viewed in terms of normal diet selection in dogs, and the effect of “contrafreeloading”; these dogs may be motivated to perform operant behaviors such as begging in order to get food. For picky eaters, scavengers and food thieves, a very successful solution is therefore to provide all food through puzzle or activity feeders and training, which enhances the “contrafreeloading” and foraging aspects of feeding behavior (Figure 6). Having a range of different feeders increases the complexity and diversity of problem solving and foraging behavior available to dogs, which is more important to them than the palatability and range of food flavors. Figure 6. Activity feeding provides an outlet for normal foraging behavior. © Jon Bowen Figure 6. Activity feeding provides an outlet for normal foraging behavior. © Jon Bowen Conclusions The trend toward “natural feeding” has focused on the composition of the diet, and has increased owner awareness regarding the quality of the ingredients in their pet’s food. However, the composition of the recommended diets is often based on dietary patterns observed in modern day wolves. For all the reasons discussed previously, these diets may not be representative of what the wolf ancestors of domestic dogs ate before humans restricted their range, and they do not take into account changes that have occurred in food selection and nutritional requirements during domestication of dogs. This approach to natural feeding also overlooks aspects of feeding that may be much more important to the dog’s psychological wellbeing and the way in which they relate to us. Despite the fact that we see the same foraging behaviors in dogs as we do in wolves, most dogs are expected to take all their food from a bowl and are generally unable to forage. Many are trained using methods that exclude the use of food treats, which not only frustrates a dog’s natural drive to obtain food reinforcement through operant behaviors, but also removes one of the key aspects of the development of a trusting and non-competitive relationship between dog and owner. The subsequent obedience and behavioral problems that owners experience often lead them to use dominance and punishment-based methods that further conflict with the motivations of dogs. It is therefore important that we, as veterinarians, begin to overturn common misunderstandings of the central role that feeding had during the process of domestication, and continues to have in the forging of a relationship between a dog and its owner. References Savolainen P, Zhang Y, Luo J, et al. Genetic evidence for an East Asian origin of domestic dogs. Science 2002;298(5598):1610-1613. von Holdt B, Pollinger JP, Lohmueller KE, et al. Genome-wide SNP and haplotype analyses reveal a rich history underlying dog domestication. Nature 2010;464(7290):898-902. Ding ZL, Oskarsson M, Ardalan A, et al. Origins of domestic dog in Southern East Asia is supported by analysis of Y-chromosome DNA. Heredity 2011;108(5):507-514. Thalmann O, Shapiro B, Cui P, et al. Complete mitochondrial genomes of ancient canids suggest a European origin of domestic dogs. Science 2013;342:871-874. Ovodov ND, Crockford SJ, Kuzmin YV, et al. A 33,000 year-old incipient dog from the Altai Mountains of Siberia: Evidence of the earliest domestication disrupted by the last glacial maximum. PLOS ONE 2011. Druzhkova AS, Thalmann O, Trifonov VA. Ancient DNA analysis affirms the canid from Altai as a primitive dog. PLOS ONE 2013. Bradshaw JWS. The evolutionary basis for the feeding behavior of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus). J Nutr 2006;136(7); 1927-1931. Goldenberg M, Goldenberg F, Funk SM, et al. (2010) Diet composition of black-backed jackals, Canis mesomelas, in the Namib Desert. Folia Zool 2010;59(2):93-101. Axelsson E, Ratnakumar A, et al. The genomic signature of dog domestication reveals adaptation to a starch-rich diet. Nature 2013;495:360-364. Stahler DR, Smith DW, Guernsey DS. Foraging and feeding ecology of the gray wolf (Canis lupus): Lessons from Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, USA. J Nutr 2006;136(7);1923-1926. Osborne SR. The free food (contrafreeloading) phenomenon: A review and analysis. Animal Learning & Behavior 1977;5(3):221-235. da Silva Vasconcellos A, Adania CH, Ades C. Contrafreeloading in maned wolves: Implications for their management and welfare. App Animal Behavior Sci 2012;140:85-91. Hiby, EF, Rooney NJ, Bradshaw JWS. Dog training methods: their use, effectiveness and interaction with behavior and welfare. Anim Welfare 2004;13:63-69. Deldalle S, Gaunet F. Effects of two training methods on stress-related behaviors of the dog (Canis familiaris) and on the dog-owner relationship. J Vet Behavior 2014;1e8. Lindberg J, Björnerfeldt S, Saetre P, et al. Selection for tameness has changed brain gene expression in silver foxes. Curr Biol 2005;15(22): 915-916. Kukekova AV, Trut LN, Chase K, et al. Measurement of segregating behaviors in experimental Silver Fox pedigrees. Behavior Gen 2007;38(2):185-194. Racca A, Guo K, Meints K, et al. Reading faces: differential lateral gaze bias in processing canine and human facial expressions in dogs and 4-year-old children. PLOS ONE 2012;7(4). Macdonald DW, Carr GM. Variation in dog society: between resource dispersion and social flux. In: Serpell J, (ed). The domestic dog: its evolution, behavior and interactions with people. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press;1995;199-216. Hewson-Hughes AK, Hewson-Hughes VL, Colyer A, et al. Geometric analysis of macronutrient selection in breeds of the domestic dog, Canis lupus familiaris. Behavioral Eco 2012;168:293-304. Hewson-Hughes AK, Hewson-Hughes VL, Miller AT, et al. Geometric analysis of macronutrient selection in the adult domestic cat, Felis catus. J Exp Biol 2011;214:1039-1051. Wren JA, Ramudo AA, Campbell SL, et al. Efficacy and safety of dirlotapide in the management of obese dogs evaluated in two placebo-controlled, masked clinical studies in North America. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2007;30(1):81-89. Weber M, Bissot T, Servet E, et al. A high-protein, high-fiber diet designed for weight loss improves satiety in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2007;21(6): 1203-1208. German AJ, Holden SL, Bissot T, et al. A high-protein high-fiber diet improves weight loss in obese dogs. Vet J 2010;183:294-297. Casey RA, Loftus B, Bolster C, et al. Human directed aggression in domestic dogs (Canis familiaris): Occurrence in different contexts and risk factors. App Animal Behavior Sci 2014;152:52-63. Marshall-Pescini S, Valsecchi P, Petak I, et al. Does training make you smarter? The effects of training on dogs’ performance (Canis familiaris) in a problem solving task. Behavioural Proc 2008;78:449-454. Facebook Twitter Linkedin Jon Bowen Jon Bowen Dr. Bowen graduated from the Royal Veterinary College in 1992 and spent several years in first opinion small animal practice. Read more Other articles in this issue Issue number 24.3 Published 25/03/2021 Cats and dietary fiber Nutritionists and veterinarians have been interested in dietary fiber as a component of pet foods or as a supplement for many years. By Allison Wara and Craig Datz Read article Issue number 24.3 Published 10/03/2021 Pets and pet foods – questions and answers Veterinarians and practice support staff encounter questions and comments on a daily basis from clients regarding various aspects of petfoods, many of which are based on hearsay, popular belief and even falsehoods. By Cailin Heinze Read article Issue number 24.3 Published 10/03/2021 Calculating the energy content of pet food Why is it important to know the energy content of pet foods? By Richard Butterwick Read article Issue number 24.3 Published 10/03/2021 The psychology of managing the owner A person will often adopt a domestic animal as a response to a psychological need, such as the desire for a companion, but more often than not a future owner will focus on acquiring an animal that best meets their own needs without always considering the animal’s requirements. By Franco Favaro and Serena Adamelli Read article Log in Create an account Contact Select Language Back to top SCIENTIFIC All scientific articles Dermatology Gastro intestinal tract Health Management Urinary Vital support Weight Management PRACTICE MANAGEMENT All practice management articles ISSUES All issues Regular issues Special practice management issues Special clinical issues AUTHORS VET SYMPOSIUM Practice Management 2020 Scientific 2020 Practice Management 2019 Scientific 2019 ABOUT VET FOCUS Log inCreate an accountContact Select Language Back to top Close This PDF is exclusive to Vet Focus Members Signup to get access Create account Already registered? Log in Close Select Language Language Français Deutsch Italiano Polski Português Română Español English ภาษาไทย 한국어 Українська Русский Submit Cookie Settings 

Skip to Content Home Products All Products Browse by Type Dry Food Wet Food / Toppers Treats Health Enhancers Frozen Browse by Breed Size Small Medium Large Browse by Age Puppy Adult Senior Find the Best Bil-Jac For You Small & Medium Dog Biscuits Large Dog Biscuits Where To Buy Bil-Jac Frozen Why Bil-Jac Our Story Perfectly Prepared™ Nutrition Partnership with America’s VetDogs® For Pet Parents The Dog Blog The Puppy Hub Join the Best Friends Club Join the Puppy Club Breed Library Training Videos Two Bowl Dog Food Challenge Bil-Jac Believer Contact Us Search Icon Why Bil-Jac Our Story Perfectly Prepared™ Nutrition Partnership with America’s VetDogs® For Pet Parents The Dog Blog The Puppy Hub Join the Best Friends Club Join the Puppy Club Breed Library Training Videos Two Bowl Dog Food Challenge Bil-Jac Believer Contact Us Search Icon The Dog Blog Categories: Bil-Jac History Bil-Jac News Breeds Grooming and Care Health and Nutrition Lifestyle Pet Safety Quiz Seasonal Tips Training and Behavior Wellbeing Tips All Posts 3/29/2023 Dog Eating Habits: What Type of Eater is Your Dog? Certain dogs approach mealtime a bit differently than others. While some furry friends are happy to follow a standard feeding schedule, others may exhibit other eating habits. Here are a variety of common eating traits in dogs (and what you can do to accommodate your furry friend’s needs). The “I Got This” Eaters Ideally, your canine companion will be more than happy to follow a regular eating schedule. A good feeding regimen could mean either two or three times per day depending on the age of your dog. Either way, a good eater is patient when being fed and will happily eat her share, so you don’t have to worry too much about her eating habits. Feeding tips for dogs without any eating quirks If your dog is in great health and eating regularly, there’s not too much you need to do. As long as you feed her a high-quality dog food based on her size and age, your furry friend should continue to happily eat according to her regular schedule. Use the feeding guidelines on the food package to start. Measure according to the weight of your dog, and adjust the amount of food up or down based on activity level and if your dog is holding weight, gaining weight or losing weight. The “Panda” Eaters While some dogs are perfectly fine with portion control, other tend to chow down a bit too much. As you’d expect, overeaters simply tend to overeat, which can cause your furry friend to become overweight if you’re not careful. There are a couple of different ways to spot if your dog is an overeater. One sign is that she may devour an entire serving in a short period of time and beg for more. The same goes for treats, as well. It can be tricky to say no to that adorable face, but it’s important to limit your furry friend to what she needs instead of giving her as much food as she wants. It’s also good to avoid free feeding if your dog is an overeater. While some canines display better portion control, a big bowl of food sitting around is just an opportunity to overeat. Feeding tips for dogs who overeat If your dog is displaying signs of being overweight, you may want to consider feeding her a reduced fat formula until she returns to a healthier weight. Of course, you still want to provide her with a food that she’ll enjoy. For example, Bil-Jac Reduced Fat Recipe has 30 percent less fat than our Adult Select Formula, but still has delicious real chicken for great taste while helping you manage your dog’s weight. The “Mealtime is Not Fun Time” Eaters Unlike overeaters, picky dogs may not want anything to do with what’s in their bowl. Whether it’s because they’re particular or they’ve been spoiled by treats or other snacks, these particular pooches will ignore some or all of their food if it’s not up to their standards. Regularly passing on portions of a meal is a problem, as it’s important for your pooch to clean her plate and ensure a balanced diet. Feeding tips for picky dogs When your furry friend is being fussy about her food, it’s important to find something that she can’t turn down. One solution is to give her something delicious, such as Bil-Jac Picky No More Dry Food, made with real chicken liver. Once you find a food that entices your picky eater, make sure she focuses on those tasty meals and avoid giving her any human food or too many other treats. The “Tactful Timers” While some dogs are picky, other dogs refrain from eating because of some form of sensitivity. This could be because your dog has an issue with some of the ingredients in her dog food, such as a sensitivity to certain ingredients or how the food is made. Your dog may also experience discomfort when eating because of a dental issue or some other problem. In either case, you’ll want to address your dog’s sensitivity and provide her with a food that’s right for her. Feeding tips for hesitant or sensitive dogs If your dog has a sensitivity to ingredients or how the food is made, it’s time to try a solution designed for their dietary needs. A food like our Sensitive Solutions Recipe is made with a gentle fiber blend and slow-cooked with chicken and whitefish to be easy on delicate stomachs to help you dog enjoy eating once again. As for dental issues, you’ll want to start by checking with a vet to see if the issue is preventable of fixable. In the meantime, aim for a soft, easy-to-chew dry food like Bil-Jac Dry or a Bil-Jac Wet Dog Food to make mealtime an easier process for your best friend. The “Jumping for Joy” Eaters It’s not uncommon for dogs to get excited around mealtime – tasty food is worth cheering – but some canine companions can take this celebration a bit far. Signs of excitable behavior can include zooming around, barking, jumping, and even knocking the food bowl over in a rush of adrenaline. Feeding tips for excitable dogs Some excited behaviors aren’t necessarily bad, so you’ll have to determine your own tolerance level for various habits. If you want to try and train your dog to calm down during mealtime, you’ll need to try and refocus her excitement. Feeding your dog after boisterous behavior will only reward her for that behavior, so try to get her to sit and stay in place first before you fill her bowl. If she starts to get up or bark, stop and tell her “no” before getting her to sit and stay again (don’t be afraid to use a treat to get her attention). It may take a few tries but repeating this practice over several days will help associate that calm behavior with food. The “Back-off-My-Bowl” Eaters Mealtime is a happy occasion, but some furry friends can get a bit defensive when it comes to their food. Certain canine companions may display signs of resource guarding, which is behavior that’s intended to drive other dogs, or even humans, away from something. In this case, that may mean growling, nipping, or other means to prevent others from taking their kibble. Feeding tips for protective eaters In some cases, food guarding doesn’t need to be retrained – simply giving your dog some space during meals will suffice. If defensive behaviors are starting to impact others in the house, you may need to take some measures to limit preventive behaviors. According to the ASPCA, that means going through a multi-stage process where you acclimate your dog toward your presence during meals while rewarding her with treats. Over time, this process will help your dog associate your presence near her food to positive experiences. Tasty, Nutritious Dog Food for all Eating Habits No matter what type of eater your dog is, your furry friend deserves the best. Want to learn more about what you can do to keep your dog happy and healthy? Join our Best Friends Club today to receive our exclusive email newsletter full of articles on training tips, healthy habits, and members-only discounts on Bil-Jac Dog Food, Treats, and other products. Join the Best Friends Club Related Blog Posts Health and Nutrition Choosing the Best Dry Dog Food for Picky Eaters Health and Nutrition, Lifestyle My Dog Isn't Eating, Should I Be Worried? Health and Nutrition Do Dogs Need Meat? The Importance of Animal Protein for Dogs Health and Nutrition, Lifestyle What to do When Your Dog Eats Something They Shouldn’t Reduced Fat Formula 30% less fat than Bil-Jac Adult Select. Sensitive Solutions Digestive & Immune Support Advanced nutrition for sensitive dogs. Sensitive Solutions Skin & Stomach Support Features the SmartDefense™ System, with vitamins C & E. Picky No More™ Small Breed Created to please even the pickiest of small breed dogs. Picky No More™ Medium & Large Breed Created to please even the pickiest of medium & large breed dogs. Little-Jacs® Small size is perfect for treating any time. Original Recipe Dog Treats The perfect everyday treat. Best Friends Club Sign up to receive the latest news! Back to The Dog Blog Connect with us! #BILJACBELIEVER Breed Library Bil-Jac Frozen Careers Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Coupon Policy Contact Us © 2023 Bil-Jac. All rights reserved. × Search Search 

STUDY MATERIALEXAMSPRODUCTSABOUT USFree Sign UpEnvironmental Studies Text Cum Work Book>Varieties of Food>Exercise 7>Q 1EASY3rd Karnataka BoardIMPORTANTEarn 100Write down the food habit of Dog. SolutionHintSolve with usStep 1The animals which eat both plants and animals and their products are called omnivorous animals. Dogs love to eat meat, fish, vegetables, chicken, rice, etc., It is a pet animal which can be tamed easily at home. Puppies drink their mother's milk. Reveal StepCheckFree Sign UpAsk a DoubtGet Free AppLearn and Prepare for any exam you want !NCERT BooksNCERT Class 12 BooksNCERT Class 11 BooksNCERT Class 10 BooksNCERT Class 9 BooksNCERT Class 8 BooksNCERT Class 7 BooksNCERT Class 6 BooksNCERT SolutionsNCERT Solutions for Class 12NCERT Solutions for Class 11NCERT Solutions for Class 10NCERT Solutions for Class 9NCERT Solutions for Class 8NCERT Solutions for Class 7NCERT Solutions for Class 6School BoardsCBSE Class 6CBSE Class 7CBSE Class 8CBSE Class 9CBSE Class 10CBSE Class 11CBSE Class 12Tamil Nadu Board Class 10Karnataka Board Class 10ICSE Class 9Entrance ExamsNEETJEE MainMHT CETJEE AdvancedAP EAMCETTS EAMCETKCETKVPYBITSATCLATVITEEEKEAMAP EAPCETNATAGUJCETSRMJEEEGCETCOMEDK UGETCUSAT CATASSAM CEEHelpNoticesPrivacy PolicyContact UsTerms & ConditionsJoin UsInvestor RelationsTakeDown Policy© Copyright 2023, Embibe. All rights reserved 

Search Contact Chat Live Contact Us 1-800-889-8967 Track Order - Returns - Shipping Info My Account Sign In New Customer? Start here My Orders Check Order Auto Reship My Orders My Profile My Pets My Favorites My Rewards Auto Reship Sign Out Cart Total: items $299.99 Review Cart dogs cats shop by brands Sales Sale Specials other pets pharmacy My Account Auto Reship Dog Cats Other Pets Shop by Brand Top Sellers Cart Total: items $299.99 Review Cart Search Contact Chat Live Contact Us 1-800-889-8967 Track Order - Returns - Shipping Info My Account Sign In New Customer? Start here My Orders Check Order Auto Reship cart Cart Total: items $299.99 Review Cart Dogs Flea & Tick Protection Topicals Oral Treatments Collars Shampoos & Dips Joint Supplements Hip & Joint Maintenance Extra Strength Joint Support Senior Joint Supplements Joint Max Triple Strength Dental Products Toothbrushes & Toothpastes Dental Treats Dental Water Additives Ora-Clens Oral Hygiene Chews Health & Wellness Allergy Aids Pain Medications Ear & Eye Care Dewormers Vaccines First Aid Remedies Behavioral & Training Calming Aids Housetraining Training Aid Feeding Supplies Automatic Feeders & Waters Slow Feeding Bowls Dog Treats & Chews All-Natural Treats & Biscuits Bones & Rawhide Dental Treat Training Treats Lil Bitz Training Treat Dog Toys Balls & Fetch Toys Chew Toys Interactive Dog Toys Plush & Stuffing Free Dog Food Dry Dog Food Wet Dog Food Veterinary Diets Pet Beds Pillow, & Lounger Beds Crates, Carriers & Kennels Pet Cot Beds Dog Supplies Collars, Leashes & Harnesses Stain & Odor Removal Dog Apparel Pet Tech & Gadgets Cats Flea & Ticks Topicals Oral Treatments Collars Spray, Wipes & Powders Joint Supplements Hip & Joint Maintenance Extra Strength Joint Support Senior Joint Supplements Joint Max for Cats Lysine Products Felisyl Immune System Support Enisyl-F Lysine Supplement Health & Wellness Allergy Aids Skin & Coat Hairball Relief Ear & Eye Cleansers Behavioral & Training Feliway Diffusers and Sprays Pet Organics Anxiety & Stress Sentry Calming Solutions Cat Scratchers Feeding Supplies Automatic Feeders & Waters Stainless Steel Bowls Cat Treats & Chews Dental Cat Treats Natural Cat Treats Meaty Cat Treats Freeze Dried Cat Treats Lil Bitz Training Treats for Cats Cat Toys Interactive Cat Toys Teaser Cat Toys Cat Balls Catnip Toys Cat Food Dry Cat Food Wet Cat Food Cat Beds Pillow & Lounger Beds Cat Trees & Condos Catnip Scratching Boards Cat Supplies Collars, Leashes & Harnesses Crates & Cages Pet Grooming Supplies Shampoos & Conditioners Litter & Litter Boxes Shop by Brands Top Sellers Top Sellers for Dogs (See All) Joint Max TS Soft Chews CET Toothpaste 2.5 oz Bonies All Natural Treats Ora-Clens Oral Hygiene Chews Seresto Flea & Tick Collar Azodyl Capsules Fortiflora Canine Supplement Zymox Otic Enzymatic Solution Greenies Pill Pockets Chondro Flex Top Dog Brands (See All) Bayer Nutramax Vetriscience Vetoquinol Merial Pet Health Solutions Simply Wild Dog Food Missing Link Ceva Animal Health Green Pet Organics Virbac Top Sellers for Cat (See All) Feliway Diffuser AminAvast Kidney Support Spot Wide Colorful Springs Toy Seresto Flea & Tick Collar Enisyl-F Lysine Supplement Fortiflora Feline Probiotics Tapeworm Dewormer Laxacat Advantage II for Cats CET Toothpaste Top Cat Brands (See All) Felisyl Immune Support Advantage II Cosequin for Cats Ceva Catego Frontline for Cats Pill Pockets Joint Max KONG for Cats Pure Bites for Cats Sales Buy 2 get 1 Free Joint Max 20% Discount New Arrivals Sales Buy 2 Get 1 Free Joint Max 20% Off New Arrivals Other Pets Dog Top Dog Categories Joint Supplements Flea & Tick Supplies Dog Treats & Chews Dog Toys Dog Food Skin & Coat Kidney, Liver & Renal Health Pillow, Bolsters & Lounger Beds Collars, Leashes & Harnesses Dog Training Supplies View All Top Dog Brands CET Chews Cosequin K9 Advantix II Azodyl Glyco Flex III Joint Max Triple Strength Fortiflora Bonies Treats PHS Simply Wild Dog Food See More Cat Top Cat Categories Joint Supplements Flea & Tick Supplies Dog Treats & Chews Dog Toys Dog Food Skin & Coat Kidney, Liver & Renal Health Pillow, Bolsters & Lounger Beds Collars, Leashes & Harnesses Dog Training Supplies View All Top Cat Brands Feliway Azodyl Fortiflora Cosequin for Cats Zymox Otic Advantage II Enisyl F CET Toothpaste Laxacat See More Horse Top Horse Categories Dewormers Wound Care Pain & Soreness Relievers Hoof Care Stress Relief Eye Care Grooming Treats Weight Management Digestives Accessories VIEW ALL Top Horse Brands UlcerGard Recovery Horse Joint Care Absorbine Cosequin Joint MAX GLC & Actistatin EquiThrive LubriSyn Panacur Kenetic VIEW ALL Bird Top Bird Categories Toys & Accessories Cages & Coops Wild Bird Feeders Feeding Supplies Foods & Treats Nutritional Supplements VIEW ALL Top Bird Brands Tropimix Living World Hagen Lafeber VIEW ALL Fish Top Fish Categories Aquariums & Bowls Air Pumps Decorations & Ornaments Filter Cartridges Filters & Powerheads Heaters & Thermometers Lighting Maintenance & Supplies Fish Food Fish Medications & Vitamins Water Treatment & Additivies VIEW ALL Top Fish Brands Thomas Labs Marina Tetra Hagen Laguna AquaClear Fluval Aqueon Hikari Dr Tim's Aquatics VIEW ALL Small Pets Top Small Pet Categories Water Bottles Pet Beddings Feeding Accessories Habitats & Accessories Pet Toys Transport Accessories Food & Treats Health & Supplements Dental Care VIEW ALL Top Small Pet Brands Habitrail Kaytee Hagen Super Pet Living World Lixit Nupro VIEW ALL Reptile Top Reptile Categories Heating Lighting Substrates & Bedding Temperature & Humidity Terrariums & Habitats Filtration Decor Accessories Reptile Food Reptile Care VIEW ALL Top Reptile Brands Exo Terra Zoo Med TerraFauna Rep-Cal BioBubble VIEW ALL My Account Auto Reship Home > Pagespages > Properly Managing Your Dog's Eating HabitsProperly Managing Your Dog's Eating HabitsProperly Managing Your Dog's Eating HabitsIn order to properly manage your dog's eating habits, you must be knowledgeable in what constitutes a good diet for your pet. Like people, dogs require a nutritious diet in order to develop strong minds and bodies. The more you learn about the dietary needs of your animal, the better informed choices you can make in his dietary care.Choosing Quality Dog FoodOne of the best ways to choose healthy and nutritious dog food is to inspect the ingredients on the label of the food you want to buy. Dog food nutrition is not dependent on the price or popularity of the brand, but rather on the nutrients contained within.Your pet will benefit from food that is well balanced in nutritional value, containing the appropriate vitamins, minerals and proteins his body needs.Dog food manufacturers categorize their products into life stages to further assist you in choosing the appropriate food for your pet. These life stages are as follows:growth (for puppies)adult maintenance (for grown dogs)gestation/lactation (for pregnant and/or nursing female dogssenior (for elderly animals)and all life (appropriate for all dogs throughout their lives)Other factors that come into play when choosing food for your dog are his personal taste preferences, his lifestyle, health problems and personal environment. Some dogs enjoy the crunchy feel of dry dog food on their teeth, while others prefer the moist, easy to chew kind. Some dog foods are also easier to digest than others. By experimenting with different brands, you can determine which ones your pet enjoys most as well as which foods enhance his health. As a dog owner, it is up to you to discover what diet best suits your pet so that he can grow healthy and strong and enjoy life to the fullest.Developing Healthy Eating HabitsAnother important aspect of managing your pet's diet is frequency of feeding. Many pet owners overfeed their animals, resulting in their pets becoming lazy and fat. Most dog food packages give guidelines on how much food and how often to feed your pet. However, you should also use your discretion in the matter. Both an overweight and underweight condition in a dog will have unhealthy consequences. By helping your pet maintain an adequate weight level, he will live a longer and happier life.Your dog's feeding habits can also be regulated by his life stage. Puppies, for example, require more calories than adult dogs, due to their active nature. An energetic and active puppy will burn more calories faster than his adult counterpart. Once a puppy has been weaned, he can be fed thrice daily until he reaches the age of four to six months. Then you can cut back on his feedings to two a day. Adult dogs generally eat one or two meals per day. Sometimes feeding your dog twice per day is easier on his digestion. The older a dog gets, the less active he becomes. Therefore, you should watch the amount of calories your older pet consumes to avoid problems with obesity. Contact Ussales@entirelypets.comTel: 800-889-8967About Us Track OrderMy AccountLog-inTrack Order Reward Program SalesSale SpecialsBuy 2 Get 1 FreeJoint Max SaleCustomer CareHelp CenterGives Back to Charity✈ Shipping & Return PolicyPromotion Exclusions 

Toggle navigation 641-236-6869 641-236-6869 Home AboutMission Statement Meet the Team New PatientsOnline Forms Payment Options Services Testimonials Virtual Office Tour Contact Feeding Your PetA healthy and balanced diet is essential for a healthy and happy pet. Not only will it provide your pet with enough energy for his day to day activities, but it is also vital for proper brain function. An adequate diet is also particularly important for animals in the early stages of their development.One of the most important things to remember when it comes to feeding your pet is to feed them by ‘life-stage’. Different animals, and in particular cats and dogs, require different nutrition at different stages of their life. For example, puppies around 12 weeks of age will require around 3 meals a day and it is not until they reach around 6 months of age that this amount should be reduced. That said, your animal may prefer smaller and more frequent meals. They key to feeding your pet properly is understanding what works best for them.Methods of FeedingA popular method of feeding is known as ‘free-feeding’. This is where a bowl of food is left out so that a pet can eat as much or as little and as frequently as they prefer. This works best for dry foods since they do not spoil as quickly as the wet variety. Some studies show that this method results in over-eating and subsequent pet obesity. However it may be the best option for you if you cannot stick to a feeding schedule.Scheduled portioned feeding requires a strict routine that you need to be able to guarantee to stick to. Your pet will know when meal times are and ensure that they are ready for them, with cats coming indoors specifically at these times. This method limits the amount that your pet eats either by portion size or by time as some pet owners prefer to give their animals a specific time frame in which they must eat. This method also works well if you have pets that required medication to be mixed with their food, or have an animal on a calorie-controlled diet.If you are unsure which method is right for your pet, consult with your veterinarian who will be more than happy to provide advice.General Feeding AdviceDo NOT offer home cooked meals. These may not meet the complex nutritional needs of your pet. Instead stick to especially formulated pet foods.DogsThe first ingredient listed in any dog food should be a specified meat. If the first ingredient listed is a wheat, corn, meat by-product or bone meal then this dog food should be avoided. Dogs’ teeth are primarily made up of canines which are designed for shredding meat not grinding grains.Dogs should be kept on the same brand and type of food as much as possible. Regularly changing them could cause him to have an upset stomach. If you do have to change then try and introduce the new food gradually so that your dogs’ digestive system has a chance to adjust.CatsTo cats the odor of their food is particularly important and they prefer their food to be around body temperature when they consume it. Glass or ceramic bowls do not absorb externals odors and are the best choice for feeding. They also like to be able to see their surroundings when they eat and not backed into a corner.Cats naturally prefer grazing on small meals and so dry food free-feeding is often the most popular choice for mealtimes.Protein and fats are the most palatable types of food for cats and they much prefer the texture of meat to anything else.RabbitsRabbits need at least one bunny-sized bundle of hay every day. Accompany this with a handful of washed leafy green vegetables or herbs such as kale, lettuce, broccoli, sage or mint. Try and offer variety to ensure your rabbit gets a good mix of nutrients.Lawnmower clippings are NOT safe for your rabbit to eat.When choosing pellets opting for good quality is important. As a general rule you should feed your rabbit one eggcup of pellets per kg of your rabbits’ weight. E.g. if you rabbit weights 1kg then you should only give them one eggcup of pellets every day.Do not give your rabbit muesli!Treats for rabbits should be infrequent and limited to carrots and apples. Helpful Articles DogsCanine Distemper Canine Parvovirus Picking Your Perfect Puppy CatsFeline Distemper Picking Your Perfect Cat HealthDental Hygiene and Care Euthanasia Feeding Your Pet Flea Prevention and Care General Pet Safety Heartworm Heatstroke Awareness Pet Grooming Pet Obesity Recognizing An Ill Pet Seasonal Care Ticks Vaccinations and Examinations GeneralBringing Your Pet Home Pets and Kids How to Adopt Traveling With Your Pet Training Your Pet Finding a Reputable Breeder InformationAddress: 611 West St, Grinnell, IA 50112 Phone: 641-236-6869 Email: staff.allpets@gmail.com Useful LinksServices Meet The Team Online Forms Privacy Policy Office HoursDayTimeMonday8:00 - 5:00Tuesday8:00 - 5:00Wednesday8:00 - 5:00Thursday8:00 - 8:00Friday8:00 - 5:00Saturday9:00 - 12:00SundayClosed Powered by Form submitted successfully! You are missing required fields. Dynamic Error Description There was an error processing this form. Close Experience Excellence in Veterinary Care CellHomeWork DogCat JanuaryFebruaryMarchAprilMayJuneJulyAugustSeptemberOctoberNovemberDecember 12345678910111213141516171819202122232425262728293031 8:00am9:00am10:00am11:00am12:00pm1:00pm2:00pm3:00pm4:00pm5:00pm We will review your request and confirm your appointment as soon as possible. Form submitted successfully! You are missing required fields. Dynamic Error Description There was an error processing this form. Close × Login Forgot Password? OR Sign in with Facebook Sign in with Google Looking to create an account ? Already have an account? Login × Save Search × Saved Searches × Modal title One fine body… Close Save changes × Update Profile Email Name Password Confirm Password 

Skip to main content SMS Reminders Utility Navigation SMS Reminders Main navigation Products NexGard SPECTRA® for Dogs NexGard® for Dogs HeartGard30® PLUS for Dogs ParaGard® for Dogs NexGard SPECTRA® for Cats Dog Parasites Fleas Ticks Mites Worms Heartworm Tick Check Cat Parasites Fleas Ticks Mites Worms Heartworm Pet care Dog Care Cat Care Puppy Care FAQs Where to Buy Dog Care Feeding Dogs Knowing what to feed dogs and how this contributes to keeping your dog healthy is an important part of dog ownership. Tracking dog food habits and managing what dogs eat is a critical part of caring for our pets. Read on to find further information on feeding dogs and dog feeding habits.& How Much to Feed a Dog Knowing how much to feed a puppy or dog is essential, as feeding dogs the right amount of quality food is one of the most important things you can do to keep them healthy and happy. The amount of food they need will vary based on a number of factors, including dog weight, the age of your dog and the level of activity of your dog. If you feed your dog too little, they can be impacted by nutritional deficiencies, and if you feed them too much, they may become overweight which can result in other health problems. What Can Dogs Eat? Providing a well-balanced dog diet for your pet will help them to stay happy and healthy. Dog kibble, also known as dry diets, are very popular choices with dog owners. Wet diets (e.g. canned dog food) are also widely available. Some people prefer to feed home-cooked diets, however, it is important to provide a balanced diet appropriate for your dog’s life stage so please speak to your veterinarian for advice on the most appropriate diet for your individual dog. To reduce the risk of transmission of infectious diseases and parasites, it is safer to offer cooked rather than raw meat for dogs. Safe fruits and veggies for dogs include apples (de-seeded and cored), carrots, peas and potatoes. Foods Dogs Can’t Eat While there are many human foods that dogs can eat safely, there are many that are harmful and potentially life-threatening. Foods like chocolate, onion, garlic, raisins, grapes and macadamia nuts are all toxic to dogs. When feeding dogs, it is always important to check with your veterinarian if you’re unsure whether a particular type of food is safe for dogs. For more information on poisonous foods and other potential poisons for dogs click here. FAQs What is raw feeding for dogs? Raw feeding is when dogs are offered uncooked animal products (e.g. meat or bones), fruits or vegetables. To reduce the risk of transmission of infectious diseases and parasites, it is safer to offer cooked rather than raw meat to dogs. You should speak to your vet about the most appropriate diet for your individual dog. What are good feeding times for dogs? It is common practice to offer dogs two meals each day about 12 hours apart. Puppies will need to eat more regularly (for example 3-4 smaller meals spread throughout the day). You should speak to your vet about the most appropriate number of meals for your individual dog. Related Articles Image Image B02 - Flea treatment for dogs Dog Fleas Flea treatment for dogs Read about flea treatments for dogs Image Image B05 - Does my dog have ear mites Dog Mites Does my dog have ear mites? Know what to look for Image Image B07 - Does my dog have worms Dog Worms Does my dog have worms? Know what to look for View more Copyright and Trademark Notice NEXGARD SPECTRA®, NEXGARD®, HEARTGARD30® and PARAGARD® are registered trademarks of the Boehringer Ingelheim Group. ©2021-2022 Boehringer Ingelheim Animal Health Australia Pty. Ltd. All rights reserved. PET-0228-2022 For You & Your Pet Home Products Dog Parasites Cat Parasites FAQs Pet Care Tick Check Education Contact Us Product Labels Legal Privacy Policy Terms of Use Reference: †Animal Medicines Australia (Baron) Audit Report - NexGard and NexGard SPECTRA, HeartGard30 Plus and ParaGard value combined – Pet Parasiticide Category MAT Dec 2019. 

518 45A Street 1.888.665.0856 Contact Us Print 0 - $0.00 CAD Your shopping cart is empty! Customer Login Retailer Login HomeDogsPuppy NutritionPuppy DevelopmentPuppy Feeding ChartsFeeding CalculatorDog Feeding BehaviorDog Pregnancy & LactationDog NutritionDog EvolutionCanine DesignDiet TransitionCatsCat EvolutionCat NutritionKitten NutritionPregnancy & LactationSample Menu For KittensFeeding CalculationsCat Feeding BehaviourDiet TransitionFeline DesignUsRetailersLocate A RetailerProductsEducational Videos and BooksWhole Animal Dinners (with 5% veg & fruit)Whole Animal DietsHealth Care / SupplementsRaw Meaty BonesSpecialty Diet OptionsPixiesLearnGeneralFAQsHistory of Dog FoodRaw or CookedThe Question of BacteriaWhat Is In Some Other Dog FoodsWhy Dogs Eat PoopWhat's In KibbleRaw DietIt’s not in the Bag!Feature ArticlesHealthDiabetesDog ParasitesHypothyroidismCarnivores & Liver Disease Pet ConstipationPet Emergency First AidSupplementsEFA SupplementationFeeding Pets For CancerFood Variety For PetsPet SupplementsContact Looking for our Supplements? Buy Supplements Here! Dog Feeding BehaviorWild canids such as wolves, coyotes, and foxes, detect prey through scent, tracking and chance encounters. Although these animals are skilled predators, researchers have long noted that they are opportunists as well, preferring to take down the very young, the very old, the weak, or the diseased of its prey species. As you might expect, these disadvantaged animals are the easiest to catch. Weakened animals are easy to spot, advertising their condition to canid predators through body stance, uncoordinated or slow movements, the smell of wounds or infection or some other tangible signal. The only animal that habitually preys upon prime, mature animals is man. Despite the preference for easier kills, the wild canids’ predation efficiency is surprisingly low. Contrary to popular belief, most prey chased by wild canids actually gets away. However, once a weak individual is selected, it is usually brought down after a chase. Generally, the chases are short but there are exceptions. The actions of a predator pack are dependent on many things, including how hungry they are, which prey species they are hunting, and, the reaction of their targeted prey. Prey that runs is usually chased while prey that stands its ground may be able to bluff off its pursuers. When studying the relationship between predator and larger prey animals we see that it is not only prey species that are at risk during confrontations. Large prey such as deer or moose can easily inflict serious wounds to attacking predators, sometimes even fatal ones. Cracked ribs, open wounds, and even broken legs are a major risk for the hunters. Wild canids use various strategies when hunting. Although somewhat unclear, it appears they employ what seems to be a conscious strategy - sending out one or two animals in the pack to herd prey into an ambush. For instance, they prefer to attack sheep from above. They may split-up to skirt both sides of an area and then flush herbivore prey toward a middle point where they cannot escape. They reputedly lay low in the grass, switching their tails from side to side to attract curious prey. They have been observed herding prey onto lake ice where the large animals loose their footing. Unless the wild canid locates their prey by chance encounter, their manner of approaching the prey animal usually goes unchanged. Direct scenting and tracking both allow the sensing of prey for long distances moving directly upwind. As they close the gap between themselves and their prey they become eager but remain restrained. They quicken their paces, wag their tails, and peer ahead intently. They seem anxious to leap forward at full speed but continue to hold themselves in check. This stalking scenario is true whether hunting alone, in a small pack or a large one. In cases where the stalk is used, they steal as close to the prey as they can without making it flee. The phase of the hunt that immediately follows the stalk is the encounter, the point at which prey and predator confront each other. The prey animal responds by approaching the predator or standing its ground or fleeing. Seldom do prey animals approach the wild canid, however; moose, elk, and musk oxen are known to stand their ground, probably due to their formidable sizes. As soon as the predators see their quarry has sensed them but is not running, they stop their stalk. Larger prey is usually able to fend off a pack of predators. Smaller prey such as deer or the calves of larger prey are almost defenseless. The flight of the prey during the encounter stage of the hunt almost always results in an immediate rush. The rush is the most critical stage of the hunt. If the canid predator fails to get close to their quarry during this stage, the prey runs off at top speed and the predators may never get close to it. The final stage of the hunt is the chase, which is really a continuation of the rush, in which the prey flees and the predators follow. If they catch up to their quarry, they may attack. If they fall behind, they give up quickly. Although the pursuit sometimes goes on for miles, it usually covers a shorter distance and lasts only a few minutes. When the canid predators attack they usually seize their prey, especially larger species, by the rump or the nose. The actual death of the prey usually results from massive blood loss, shock, or both. With smaller prey such as hare, a neck bite will often snap the backbone. Although wild canids will gorge if they have gone hungry for several days, or even an entire week, they do not overeat. The ingestion of food is regulated by the liver, which stores excess glucose as glycogen, and by the hunger and satiety centers in the brain. When the liver is topped up with glycogen, their satiety centre is activated and they will not eat. After going hungry for a time, the liver's supply of glycogen is released into the blood as glucose. When the supply is depleted the hunger centre is activated. No soft portion of a large or small prey carcass is ignored by hungry canids and seemingly obscure parts may be important sources of required nutrients or aid in absorbing other sources. Wild canids generally tear into the body cavity of large prey, pulling out and consuming the large internal organs, such as lungs, liver, and heart. The large rumen is usually punctured during removal and its content spilled. The plant material in the intestinal tract is of little interest to wolves, but the stomach lining and intestinal wall are consumed. Smaller internal organs, such as kidneys and spleen, are then exposed and eaten without delay. Sometimes the rumen contents, with or without the surrounding rumen wall freeze and become one of few signs left of a winter kill. The liver of prey may be one of the more important organs for wild canids to eat, based on the variety of important vitamins and minerals it provides. Brain tissue contains the highest amount of polyunsaturated fatty acids, some of which are required for body maintenance. Thus the brain of prey animals is inevitably eaten, so long as wild canids are able to break open the skull. Mucous membranes, an important part of ungulate stomachs, intestines and snouts are a vital source of essential fatty acids. Muscle tissue contains only about 1% essential fatty acids, while the heart contains 3-4%, the liver 4-7% and the brain over 11%. After choice organs are consumed, the large muscle masses (meat) associated with a prey animal provides the bulk of the food consumed. All muscle tissue is very high in protein, containing all of the essential amino acids. Muscle tissue is very low in carbohydrates. The fat content of meat can vary widely depending on the species and breed of animal, and the anatomical part of its body. Bones and other connective tissue from prey are required by wild canids as the major source of calcium for the maintenance of their own skeletons. Bone combined with meat is extremely well-balanced food for canids. In the nineteenth century, dogs experimentally fed only tendons died, but dogs fed only fresh bones thrived for long periods. Single wild canids, which often scavenge, may not see a fresh kill for weeks, yet they maintain themselves on a diet of bones from old kills. Fresh bone, containing marrow, may provide 15-20% protein and an equivalent amount of fat. The wild canids' diet, except for hide and bone, is highly digestible - generally in excess of 90%, based on experiments with domestic dogs. Fat is the most thoroughly digested component of the diet (97%), followed by protein (93%). The wild canids’ digestive system is so strong that it usually breaks down every bit of protein that has been eaten. As a result, their scats (stool) contain very little fecal matter. The stool is usually grey or white and contains chips of bone and fur compacted and held together by mucus. Its interior is yellowish and granular and, even in a fresh dropping, little odor reaches the human nose. Plant matter is consumed separately, particularly ripe wild fruit. Wild canids eat grass (14-43% frequency) possibly to clean the digestive tract and purge the intestines of parasites or the stomach of hair that delays passage of food through the gut. Made up of cellulose, the grass itself is never digested. Grass is particularly favored in the spring and fall when it is most succulent, sweet and interestingly when the protein content is somewhat higher. What’s on the Wild Canids’ Menu? Wolf Small prey is frequently eaten by wolves in the summer but relatively little of the wolf's food come from small prey. The major sources of meat in the wolf's diet are moose, elk, musk ox, Dall sheep, Rocky Mountain sheep, bison, caribou, reindeer or deer, depending on the area, the season and the year. Two wolves consuming a caribou carcass provide an example of wolf feeding behavior. "In the first 15 minutes, the back strap, some skin, haunch muscles, some ribs, a kidney and a piece of small intestine were consumed. A caching trip of 20 minutes was then undertaken and in the ensuing 2 hours, meat from the backbone, rib cage, haunch, and legs was eaten and the lungs were removed. In the next 2 hours, meat from the ribs and a leg was eaten; then the carcass was left for 4 hours, presumably while the wolves slept. They returned to feed over a 3 hour period on muscle from the ribs and hindquarters plus mesenteries. After 10 hours, part of the heart was eaten and the remainder cached, the lungs were eaten and another caching trip was undertaken." Wolves also prey on beaver, snowshoe hare, ducks, marmots, mice, squirrels, grouse, geese, and rabbits. Wolves fish too, by wade-herding and trapping salmon, arctic grayling or whitefish. They eat carrion and occasionally insects, especially when they encounter them in epidemic populations. Perhaps because of the greater availability of fruit, wolves in parts of Europe may feed on plant material more extensively than those in North America. Fruit may provide vitamins for wolves in summer, as even in North America it is not uncommon to find seeds from raspberries and blueberries in wolf scats. Cherries, berries, apples, figs, pears, plums, grapes, melon and watermelon have been reported in wolf scats. Coyote Although coyotes aren't considered genetically related to the domestic dog as are wolves; their eating habits provide useful comparisons about carnivore nutrition. Not many mammals and very few carnivores are able to live well on a diet as varied as that of the coyote. Biologists have analyzed coyote stomach contents in various parts of North America and the results are pretty much the same. Coyotes depend on smaller mammals, especially rodents, for half of all their bulk and nutrition. Rabbits, hares, gophers, ground squirrels and especially mice are what a coyote is most likely to encounter during a typically meandering hunting trip. But these hunters will also eat any bird, insects, reptiles, amphibians or even fish they can catch. All kinds of vegetable matter, including some greens and especially fruit are consumed too. In one study, a coyote's stomach contained over five hundred grasshoppers. Rattlesnakes, meadowlarks, frogs, blackbirds, fallen apples, and persimmons are all fair game. So are large animals, wild and domestic, depending on the season, availability and the locality. Red Fox Biologists estimate that a healthy fox can travel through dense bush at speeds up to thirty miles per hour, seeming to glide over deadfalls or duck under them with equal ease. That is fast enough to capture most of the sixty-three species of small animals, birds, and insects found in its diet. However, cottontail rabbits, meadow voles, mice, and insects make up two-thirds of that total. Young birds, like quail, pheasants, and grouse are caught and eaten each spring. In late summer and fall, especially during years of abundance, foxes eat quantities of both cultivated fruits and berries. An orchard where ripened apples or pears have fallen to the ground is a good place to watch at daybreak and dusk for red foxes as well as for coyotes and gray foxes. Gray foxes are able to forage in trees. This is done by gripping a trunk with its forepaws, then gradually pushing itself higher with the long claws of its rear feet. The fox is comfortable enough in some trees to be able to jump or climb from limb to limb when hunting birds, especially small bird nests that contain eggs or hatchlings. Our chief scientist Mother Nature is pleased to offer you some of her finest work. The information on this website is not intended to replace Veterinary medical advice. Carnivora™ 518 45A Street 1.888.665.0856 Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Search Site Map © 2023 Carnivora™. All Rights Reserved. Home Dogs Puppy Nutrition Puppy Development Puppy Feeding Charts Feeding Calculator Dog Feeding Behavior Dog Pregnancy & Lactation Dog Nutrition Dog Evolution Canine Design Diet Transition Cats Cat Evolution Cat Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Pregnancy & Lactation Sample Menu For Kittens Feeding Calculations Cat Feeding Behaviour Diet Transition Feline Design Us Retailers Locate A Retailer Products Educational Videos and Books Whole Animal Dinners (with 5% veg & fruit) Whole Animal Diets Health Care / Supplements Raw Meaty Bones Specialty Diet Options Pixies LearnGeneral FAQs History of Dog Food Raw or Cooked The Question of Bacteria What Is In Some Other Dog Foods Why Dogs Eat Poop What's In Kibble Raw Diet It’s not in the Bag! Feature ArticlesHealth Diabetes Dog Parasites Hypothyroidism Carnivores & Liver Disease Pet Constipation Pet Emergency First AidSupplements EFA Supplementation Feeding Pets For Cancer Food Variety For Pets Pet Supplements Contact 

(813) 839-7715 Mon-Fri 7a-7p | Sat 8a-4p Home Brandon South Tampa Book Now Brandon South Tampa Blog Contact Brandon South Tampa Top 4 Food Habits to Inculcate in Your Dog September 8th, 2017 by admin Posted in Brandon Dog Care Tags: Dog Care, Dog Food Do you share your dinner or perhaps a bite of your snack with your furry little friend? While dogs are just too cute to say no, especially when they look at you with those adorable puppy-eyes, human foods are not appropriate for dogs. The digestive system of dogs are different than that of humans and certain foods can actually be harmful for your canine. It is important that you inculcate healthy food habits in your dog from as early as possible. But for that you need to discipline yourself as well. For instance, stop giving your dog treats throughout the day; instead, follow regular meal times. Also, avoid over-feeding your dog and don’t encourage feeding from the table. You need to teach your dog to differentiate between dog food and human food and provide them with high quality canine food that are designed to keep them healthy. The following are 4 top food habits you need to teach your dog. 1. Feed Him Fresh Whole Foods According to a Brandon pet care center, fresh vegetables and fruits are essential for your dog’s health. These whole foods are packed with live enzymes and fiber, which helps digestion and improves their defecation. While dogs are carnivores and meat is their natural food, an all-meat diet also contains higher toxin levels. Fresh vegetables and fruits, on the other hand, help alkalize the body and help your dog avoid developing chronic diseases. In fact, vegetables and fruits can be a great alternative to the store-bought shelf-stable foods that you often serve as snacks. These shelf-stable foods have a longer cooking processes, which kill many of the nutrients. As a result, synthetic nutrients are added to the products to retain their food value. However, unlike synthetic nutrients, fresh vegetables and fruits have nutritional co-factors that help the body to better absorb and assimilate the nutrients. So next time you want to treat your dog, try a piece of carrot. In fact, it is also a good bone substitute for your dog’s teeth and gum maintenance. Pure vegetables too is a great option for maximum nutrient absorption. However, also remember that certain vegetables and fruits (and also parts of certain vegetables and fruits) can be poisonous for your dog and should be avoided. Talk to your vet before you start feeding your dog these whole foods. 2. Counter Condition Your Finicky Dog Does your dog just sniffs his food and rejects all but a few bites? You probably have a finicky dog! Now, there are many reasons for his behavior, ranging from his health to what and how you are feeding him. A dog can become finicky if he is sick; so if you observe that your dog has not only lost his appetite, but is also avoiding regular play and behaves in a disengaged manner, it’s time to get a vet appointment and get a thorough check-up. But if it is not his health, you need to correct the behavior of your finicky dog. As said earlier, avoid feeding your dog table scraps and/or too many treats. If your dog is more excited about the treats and things you feed him from the table, he will eventually lose interest in what’s in the bowl. Similarly, don’t offer several different foods to your dog, trying to coax him into eating something every meal. This will only encourage him to hold out for something better. Instead, follow these steps to correct the bahavior: Make it clear to your dog that that no other options exist Wait for 30 minutes after giving the food; if he doesn’t eat, take it away Set out the same food during the next meal; wait for 30 minutes and take away the food if it is still not eaten Maintain your strategy and don’t give in even if your dog is checking around for extra treats. Your dog will eat if he is hungry However, remember that it may take a little time to eliminate the finicky eating behavior. In addition, you need to careful about certain things when it comes to counter conditioning your finicky dog. If you are changing his food formula, do it gradually. For example, if you are changing from wet to dry food, mix the dry food with a small amount of warm water if the beginning. Also, combine the new food with the old food to help your dog get accustomed to the new food. 3. Try Not to Serve Cooked Meat While we don’t want our dogs to become the hunters that they have descendent from, cooked meat is something you can avoid feeding your dog whenever possible. When we cook food, we lose many beneficial nutrients. The same happens when you cook food for your dog. The reason behind this is that the muscles of animals when cooked at high temperatures, releases carcinogenic chemicals called heterocyclic amines (HCAs), which may increase the risk of cancer. And this too applies in case of your dog. If you still prefer to feed your dog cooked meat, try searing it slightly rather than cooking it through. 4. Add Essential Fatty Acids to His Diet Healthy fats are essential for your dog’s health, especially for his coat. For example, if you dog has fatty acid deficiency, it is more likely to have a dull coat and have dandruff and a dull and flaky skin. Fortunately, most dog foods are very high in Omega-3 and Omega-6. Additionally, you can also feed your dog supplements and certain whole foods like chia seed, flaxseed, hempseed, and small amounts of fresh sardines. It is better to avoid fish oils (or at least consult your vet before feeding them to your dog) as they turn rancid very easily and can affect your dog’s liver and kidneys in the long run. Also avoid giving too many fatty acid supplements, as it may cause upset stomachs and vomiting. Conclusion Nobody knows your dog better than you, so you are the best person to judge your furry friend’s diet. Discipline your dog from day 1 when it comes to food. Don’t ever let the guilty of leaving your dog alone at home make you feed or treat him more often. Learning healthy food habits takes time; be patient, your furry bundle of joy will eventually reach there and enjoy a healthy and strong life. Watch Video 4313 W. Pearl Ave., Tampa, FL 33611 © 2023 Tampa Puppy Palace. All Rights Reserved. Design & Developed by TranquilBlue 

Skip to main content VMD 513: Pet animal Breeding, Management, Nutrition and Health Care (1+1) You are currently using guest access (Log in) Page pathHome / ► Courses / ► Existing Courses / ► UG Courses - Veterinary & Animal Husbandry / ► Veterinary Sciences / ► V Year / ► IX Semester- Veterinary Science / ► Pet animal Breeding and Management / ► Topic 4 / ► Feeding behaviour of dogs Feeding behaviour of dogs FEEDING BEHAVIOUR OF DOGS Due to cooperative hunting behaviour, the dog’s ancestors (wolf) can prey on large prey species and they eat the hunt as quick as possible. The same behaviour still present in domestic dog species which leads to rapid eating of their food. The tendency to eat rapidly can be a problem for some dogs because it may predispose them to choke or swallow large amounts of air. Dog while feeding with other dogs or other livestock species tends to eat more rapidly. Changing the food less palatable or make the food difficult to eat rapidly (semi moist food are consumed more quickly than dry food) or large pieces of food are possible approaches to slow down the feeding in dogs. Adding water to the dog’s food immediately before feeding decreases the rate of eating and minimizes the chance of swallowing large amounts of air. Other approaches include adding a large ball to the bowl or purchasing a feeding bowl that includes a center hub that functions to slow eating rate. Many dogs readily consume garbage, carrion, insects, and feces that they encounter in the yard or while out walking. Plant eating, in particular grass eating, is also frequently reported by owners. Contrary to popular beliefs, there is no evidence that grass/plant eating in dogs is a sign either of illness or nutrient deficiency. Rather, grass eating appears to be a normal Candi behavior as it is widespread among wolves and has not been shown to be associated with gastrointestinal upset or the onset of vomiting. It has been suggested that plant eating in canid and felid species may play a role similar to that described in chimpanzees, who consume entire leaves from various plants, which then function to purge intestinal parasites as they travel through the gastrointestinal tract. It is possible that plant eating evolved in dogs and cats to serve the same function. Although scavenging garbage and coprophagy are considered to be normal behaviors in dogs, these behaviors can present a health and sanitation risk and generally should be prevented. Keeping the yard picked up, using supervision, and teaching dogs a reliable “leave it” command are the best approaches to controlling scavenging and stool-eating behaviors. The dog’s ancestry suggests that an intermittent feeding schedule consisting of large meals interrupted by periods of fasting is the most natural way to feed dogs. However, when dogs are given free access to food, they will consume many small meals frequently throughout the day. This pattern is similar to that seen in cats, with the exception that dogs tend to eat only during the day time. The domestic dog is quite capable of adapting to a number of different feeding regimens. These regimens include portion-controlled feeding, time-controlled feeding, or free-choice (ad libitum) feeding. Last modified: Thursday, 7 June 2012, 11:27 AM Skip NavigationNavigationHomeSite pagesTags Calendar Site news Current coursePet animal Breeding and ManagementParticipants General Topic 1 Topic 2 Topic 3 Topic 4Learning objectives Feeding behaviour of dogs Feeding Feeding schedule - home made food Feed requirement chart Principles of feeding dog Energy requirement for dog Protein requirement for dog Fat requirement in the diet of dog Requirement of essential nutritive ingredients in ... Feeding management of newborn puppies Nutritional care of orphan puppies Feeding management during growing stage Feeding management during pregnancy and lactation Feeding management for adult maintenance PODCAST Quiz Learning objectives Feeding behaviour of dogs Feeding Feeding schedule - home made food Feed requirement chart Principles of feeding dog Energy requirement for dog Protein requirement for dog Fat requirement in the diet of dog Requirement of essential nutritive ingredients in ... Feeding management of newborn puppies Nutritional care of orphan puppies Feeding management during growing stage Feeding management during pregnancy and lactation Feeding management for adult maintenance PODCAST Quiz Topic 5 Topic 6 Topic 7 Topic 8 Topic 9 Topic 10 Topic 11 Topic 12 Topic 13 Topic 14 Topic 15 Topic 16 Topic 17 Topic 18 Topic 19 Topic 20 Topic 21 Topic 22 Topic 23 Topic 24 Topic 25 Topic 26 Topic 27 Topic 28 Topic 29 Topic 30 Topic 31 Topic 32 Topic 33 Topic 34 Topic 35 Topic 36 Courses You are currently using guest access (Log in)Pet animal Breeding and Management 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1History 2Commercial varieties Toggle Commercial varieties subsection 2.1Dry 2.1.1Manufacturing process 2.2Wet 2.2.1Manufacturing process 2.3Semi-moist 2.4Dehydrated and freeze-dried 2.5Contents 2.6Quality, digestibility and energy density 2.7Labeling 3Types of diets Toggle Types of diets subsection 3.1Raw 3.2Senior 3.3Low-protein 3.3.1Disadvantages 3.3.2Advantages 3.4Hypoallergenic 3.5Grain-free and low-carbohydrate 3.6Vegetarian and vegan 4Nutrients and supplements 5Chart 6Dangers Toggle Dangers subsection 6.1Recalls 6.2Contaminants 6.2.1Mycotoxins 6.2.2Salmonella and copper 7In popular culture 8See also 9References 10External links Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Dog food 25 languages DanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançaisBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתJawaMagyarBahasa Melayu日本語Norsk bokmålРусскийSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнська粵語中文 Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationGet shortened URLCite this pageWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Food intended for consumption by dogs usually made from meat This article is about food that is produced to feed dogs. For the human consumption of dog flesh and parts, see Dog meat. For other uses, see Dog food (disambiguation). The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Dry dog food in a bowl Dog food is food specifically formulated and intended for consumption by dogs and other related canines. Dogs are considered to be omnivores with a carnivorous bias. They have the sharp, pointed teeth and shorter gastrointestinal tracts of carnivores, better suited for the consumption of meat than of vegetable substances, yet also have ten genes that are responsible for starch and glucose digestion, as well as the ability to produce amylase, an enzyme that functions to break down carbohydrates into simple sugars – something that obligate carnivores like cats lack.[1] Dogs evolved the ability living alongside humans in agricultural societies, as they managed on scrap leftovers and excrement from humans.[2][3][4] Dogs have managed to adapt over thousands of years to survive on the meat and non-meat scraps and leftovers of human existence and thrive on a variety of foods, with studies suggesting dogs' ability to digest carbohydrates easily may be a key difference between dogs and wolves.[1] The dog food recommendation should be based on nutrient suitability instead of dog's preferences. Pet owners should consider their dog's breed, size, age, and health condition and choose food that is appropriate for their dog's nutritional needs.[5] In the United States alone, the dog food market is expected to reach $23.3 billion by 2022.[6] History[edit] Prior to being domesticated, dogs, being canines, fended for themselves and survived on a carnivorous diet. After adapting them for protection, work, and companionship, people began to care at least in part for their nutritional needs. The historic record of this changing approach dates back at least 2,000 years. In 37 BCE, Virgil talks about the feeding of dogs in his Bucolics: Nec tibi cura canum fuerit postrema; sed una Veloces Spartae catulos, acremque Molossum, Pasce sero pingui:[7] "Do not let the care of dogs be last; but the swift Spartan hounds, and fierce Mastiff, Feed the whey" Around 70 CE, Columella wrote his book On Agriculture in which he addresses the feeding of dogs: Cibaria fere eadem sunt utrique generi praebenda. Nam si tam laxa rura sunt, ut sustineant pecorum greges, omnis sine discrimine hordeacea farina cum sero commode pascit. Sin autem surculo consitus ager sine pascuo est, farreo vel triticeo pane satiandi sunt, admixto tamen liquore coctae fabae, sed tepido, nam fervens rabiem creat.[8] "Provisions of victuals are almost the same for both [types of dog]. If the fields are so large as to sustain herds of animals, barley meal mixed with whey is a convenient food. But if it is an orchard without grain, spelt or wheat bread is fed mixed with the liquid from cooked beans, but warm, for boiling creates rabies." In the Avesta, written from 224 to 651 CE, Ahura Mazda advises: Bring ye unto him milk and fat with meat; this is the right food for the dog.[9] By Medieval times, dogs were more seen as pets rather than just companions and workers which affected their quality of the diet to include "Besides being fed bran bread, the dogs would also get some of the meat from the hunt. If a dog was sick, he would get better food, such as goat's milk, bean broth, chopped meat, or buttered eggs." In France, the word pâtée began to appear in the 18th century and referred to a paste originally given to poultry. In 1756, a dictionary indicates it was made of a mixture of bread crumbs and little pieces of meat given to pets.[10] In 1781, an encyclopedia mentioned an earlier practice of removing the liver, heart, and blood of a downed stag and mixing it with milk, cheese, and bread, and then giving it to dogs.[11] In 1844, the French writer, Nicolas Boyard, warned against even giving tallow graves (the dregs of the tallow pot) to dogs, though the English favored them (see below), and suggested a meat-flavored soup: By a misguided economy dogs are given meat scraps and tallow graves; one must avoid this, because these foods make them heavy and sick; give them twice a day a soup of coarse bread made with water, fat and the bottom of the stew pot; put a half-kilogram of bread at least in each soup.[12] In England, care to give dogs particular food dates at least from the late eighteenth century, when The Sportsman's dictionary (1785) described the best diet for a dog's health in its article "Dog": A dog is of a very hot nature: he should therefore never be without clean water by him, that he may drink when he is thirsty. In regard to their food, carrion is by no means proper for them. It must hurt their sense of smelling, on which the excellence of these dogs greatly depends. Barley meal, the dross of wheatflour, or both mixed together, with broth or skim'd milk, is very proper food. For change, a small quantity of greaves from which the tallow is pressed by the chandlers, mixed with their flour; or sheep's feet well baked or boiled, are a very good diet, and when you indulge them with flesh it should always be boiled. In the season of hunting your dogs, it is proper to feed them in the evening before, and give them nothing in the morning you take them out, except a little milk. If you stop for your own refreshment in the day, you should also refresh your dogs with a little milk and bread.[13] In 1833, The Complete Farrier gave similar but far more extensive advice on feeding dogs:[14] The dog is neither wholly carnivorous nor wholly herbivorous, but of a mixed kind, and can receive nourishment from either flesh or vegetables. A mixture of both is therefore his proper food,[15] but of the former he requires a greater portion, and this portion should be always determined by his bodily exertions. It was not until the mid-1800s that the world saw its first food made specifically for dogs. An American electrician, James Spratt, concocted the first dog treat. Living in London at the time, he witnessed dogs around a shipyard eating scraps of discarded biscuits. Shortly thereafter he introduced his dog food, made up of wheat meals, vegetables and meat. By 1890 production had begun in the United States and became known as "Spratt's Patent Limited". In later years, dog biscuit was sometimes treated as synonymous with dog food: The first three prize winners at the late coursing meeting at Great Bend were trained on Spratt's Patent Dog Biscuit. This same dog food won no less than three awards, including a gold medal, at the Exposition in Paris which has just closed. It would seem that the decision of the judges is more than backed up by the result in the kennel. Another good dog food is that manufactured by Austin & Graves, of Boston. They, too, seem to be meeting with great success in their line.[16] Canned horse meat was introduced in the United States under the Ken-L Ration brand after World War I as a means to dispose of excess horses no longer needed for the war.[17] The 1930s saw the introduction of canned cat food and dry meat-meal dog food by the Gaines Food Co. By the time World War II ended, pet food sales had reached $200 million. In the 1950s Spratt's became part of General Mills. For companies such as Nabisco, Quaker Oats, and General Foods, pet food represented an opportunity to market by-products as a profitable source of income.[18] Commercial varieties[edit] Dog kibble Most commercially produced dog food is made with animal feed grade ingredients and comes dry in bags (also known in the US as kibble) or wet in cans. Dry food contains 6–10% moisture by volume, as compared to 60–90% in canned food. Semi-moist products typically run 25–35%. Isotopic analysis of dog food in the Brazilian market have found that they are basically made of maize and poultry by-products.[19] Dry[edit] Dry dog food usually consists of bagged pellets that contain 3-11% water.[20] It makes up the vast majority of pet foods.[21] Manufacturing process[edit] See also: Food extrusion Dry food processing is popular in the pet food industry, as it is an efficient way to supply continuous production of feed in many varieties. It is energy efficient, allows for large amounts of feed to be used, and is cost effective.[22] To make dog kibble, a process known as extrusion is done. A simple extruder consists of a barrel, helical screws, and a die (tool to cut and shape food). Feed ingredients are solid at room temperature; therefore, the extrusion process of these ingredients requires a temperature above 150 degrees Celsius, achieved by the use of steam, hot water, or other heat sources in order to soften or melt the mixture and allow for fluidity through the barrel. During the extrusion process, the high amounts of pressure applied to the mixture forces it to enter through the die before exiting the extruder completely, where it is cut to its desired size by a rotating fly knife.[23] Unfortunately, the extrusion process actually denatures some of nutritional elements of the food. Taurine deficiency has been found in dogs[24] and cats[25] fed extruded commercial diets. Not usually considered an essential nutrient for dogs, taurine is plentiful in most whole meats, whether raw or cooked,[26] but is reduced in extruded diets. Taurine deficiency could also be due to the use of rendered, highly processed meat sources that are low in taurine. Regardless of the cause, taurine is now artificially supplemented back into the diet after processing in the production of most commercial pet food. Wet[edit] Canned food with shredded meat Wet or canned dog food usually is packaged in a solid or soft-sided container. Wet food contains roughly 60-78% water,[20] which is significantly higher in moisture than dry or semi-moist food.[27] Canned food is commercially sterile (cooked during canning); other wet foods may not be sterile. Sterilizing is done through the process of retorting, which involves steam sterilization at 121 degrees Celsius.[28][29] A given wet food will often be higher in protein or fat compared to a similar dry food on a dry matter basis (a measure which ignores moisture); given the canned food's high moisture content. A larger amount of canned food must be fed in order to meet the dog's required needs. Grain gluten and other protein gels may be used in wet dog food to create artificial meaty chunks, which look like real meat. This food is usually used for old dogs or puppies. Manufacturing process[edit] After ingredients are combined, they are placed in a tank at the end of a canning machine.[29] From there, the mixture is forced through an opening and onto a metal sheet, forming a thickness of 8 to 12mm.[29] Next, the mixture is heated to thoroughly cook the ingredients.[29] Heating can be done through the means of ovens, microwaves or steam heating.[29] The sheet containing a layer of feed is passed through the heat source that displays heat to the top and bottom of the tray, allowing the internal temperature to reach 77 degrees Celsius at a minimum.[29] Once cooked, this mixture can be directly placed into cans to form a loaf or it can be cut into "meaty" pieces for chunks and gravy formulas.[29] Semi-moist[edit] Semi-moist dog food is packaged in vacuum-sealed pouches or packets. It contains about 20-45% water by weight, making it more expensive per energy calorie than dry food. Most semi-moist food does not require refrigeration. They are lightly cooked and then quickly sealed in a vacuum package. This type of dog food is extremely vulnerable to spoiling if not kept at a cool temperature and has a shelf life of 2–4 months, unopened. Dehydrated and freeze-dried[edit] Dehydrated or freeze-dried meals come in raw and cooked forms. Products are usually air-dried or frozen, then dehydrated (freeze-dried) to reduce moisture to the level where bacterial growths are inhibited. The appearance is very similar to dry dog pellets. The typical feeding methods include adding warm water before serving. There is some concern of nutrients, such as vitamins, being lost during the dehydration process. Specialty small batches sold through specialty or online stores generally consist of some form of cooked meat, ground bone, pureed vegetables, taurine supplements, and other multivitamin supplements. Some pet owners use human vitamin supplements, and others use vitamin supplements specifically engineered for dogs.[30][31] Contents[edit] Many commercial dog foods are made from materials considered by some authorities and dog owners to be unusable or undesirable.[32] These may include: Meat and bone meal Offal (wild canines eat offal as a vital part of their diets) Animal digest Sucrose and/or fructose Animal by-products Less expensive dog foods generally include less meat and more animal by-products and grain fillers. Proponents of a natural diet criticize the use of such ingredients, and point out that regulations allow for packaging that might lead a consumer to believe that they are buying natural food, when, in reality, the food might be composed mostly of ingredients such as those listed above.[33][34] More expensive dog foods may be made of ingredients suitable for organic products or free range meats. Lamb meal is a popular ingredient. According to the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), animal by-products in pet food may include parts obtained from any animals that have died from sickness or disease, provided they are rendered in accordance to law. Cow brains and spinal cords not allowed for human consumption under federal regulation 21CFR589.2000 due to the possibility of transmission of BSE are allowed to be included in pet food intended for non-ruminant animals.[35] In 2003, the AVMA speculated changes might be made to animal feed regulations to ban materials from "4-D" animals – those who enter the food chain as dead, dying, diseased or disabled.[36] Dog treats are special types of dog food given as a reward, not as a staple food source. Quality, digestibility and energy density[edit] There are a few key components to consider when evaluating dietary needs. These factors include the quality and digestibility of the protein provided in the diet, as well as the composition of the amino acids included, and finally the energy density provided in the diet.[37] Diets containing proteins that are high in quality, composition, and digestibility require less of that protein to be present. The same can be said in regards to the energy density.[37] In contrast, high-protein diets will provide excess protein content after meeting maintenance demands; this can therefore lead to the protein being utilized in fat and energy storage.[37] This ultimately increases the risk for developing obesity and other health related issues.[38] Higher protein in the diet helps reduce lean body mass loss,[39] but will not lead to an increase in size of muscle[40] unless paired with resistance exercises[41] or anabolic steroids under maintenance conditions. Labeling[edit] Further information: Pet food § Labeling and regulation In the United States, dog foods labelled as "complete and balanced" must meet standards established by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), either by meeting a nutrient profile or by passing a feeding trial. The Dog Food Nutrient Profiles were last updated in 2016 by the AAFCO's Canine Nutrition Expert Subcommittee.[42] Critics argue that due to the limitations of the trial and the gaps in knowledge within animal nutrition science, the term "complete and balanced" is inaccurate and even deceptive. An AAFCO panel expert has stated that "although the AAFCO profiles are better than nothing, they provide false securities."[43] Certain manufacturers label their products with terms such as "premium", "ultra premium", "natural", and "holistic". Such terms currently have no legal definitions and are not regulated. There are also varieties of dog food labeled as "human-grade food." Although no official definition of this term exists, the assumption is that other brands use foods that would not pass US Food and Drug Administration inspection according to the Pure Food and Drug Act or the Meat Inspection Act.[44] The ingredients on the label must be listed in descending order by weight before cooking. This means before all of the moisture is removed from the meat, fruits, vegetables and other ingredients used.[45] Types of diets[edit] Raw[edit] Main article: Raw feeding Raw feeding is the practice of feeding domestic dogs, cats and other animals a diet consisting primarily of uncooked meat, edible bones, and organs. The ingredients used to formulate raw diets can vary. Some pet owners choose to make homemade raw diets to feed their animals but commercial raw food diets are also available.[46][47] Frozen, or fresh-prepared, meals come in raw or cooked form, some of which is made with ingredients that are inspected, approved, and certified by the USDA for human consumption, but formulated for pets.[48] Part of this growing trend is the commercialization of home-made dog food for pet owners who want the same quality, but do not have the time or expertise to make it themselves.[49] The advantage is forgoing the processing stage that traditional dog food undergoes. This causes less destruction of its nutritional integrity. The practice of feeding raw diets has raised some concerns due to the risk of foodborne illnesses, zoonosis and nutritional imbalances.[50] People who feed their dogs raw food do so for a multitude of reasons, including but not limited to: culture, beliefs surrounding health, nutrition and what is perceived to be more natural for their pets.[51] Feeding raw food can be perceived as allowing the pet to stay in touch with their wild, carnivorous ancestry.[51] The raw food movement has occurred in parallel to the change in human food trends for more natural and organic products.[46] Senior[edit] Main article: Senior dog diet Aging dogs require specialized catering. Commercially available senior dog diets address their physiological changes through various ingredients and nutrients. When looking for a senior dog food, one of the first things that should be taken into consideration is the energy content of the diet. The maintenance energy requirements decrease as a dog ages due to the loss in lean body mass that occurs.[52] Therefore, senior dogs will require a diet with a lowered energy content compared to non senior diets. Although senior dogs require lower energy content diets, they will also require diets that are higher in protein and protein digestibility. This is due to the fact that dogs have a reduced ability to synthesize proteins as they age.[53] Joint and bone health is an important factor to be considered when purchasing a senior dog food. The addition of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate has been shown to improve cartilage formation, the composition of synovial fluid, as well as improve signs of osteoarthritis.[54] The calcium to phosphorus ratio of senior dog foods is also important. Calcium and phosphorus are considered essential nutrients, according to AAFCO. Gastrointestinal health is another important factor to consider in the aging dog. Sources of fiber such as beet pulp and flaxseed should be included within senior dog foods to help improve stool quality and prevent constipation.[55][56] A current technology that is being used to improve gastrointestinal health of aging dogs is the addition of fructooligosacchardies and mannanoligosaccharides. These oligosaccharides are used in combination to improve the beneficial gut bacteria while eliminating the harmful gut bacteria.[57] The aging dog goes through changes in brain and cognitive health.[58] There are two highly important ingredients that can be included in senior dog foods to help prevent cognitive decline and improve brain health. These ingredients are vitamin E and L-carnitine. Vitamin E acts as an antioxidant, which can prevent oxidative damage that occurs during aging.[58] L-carnitine is used to improve mitochondrial function, which can also help to prevent and lower rates of oxidative damage.[58] Skin and coat health is important in all dogs, but especially becomes important as dogs age. An important nutrient to look for in senior dog foods to support coat health is linoleic acid, which can be found in corn and soybean oil.[59] Another important nutrient is vitamin A, which helps with keratinization of hair.[60] Good sources of vitamin A for skin and coat health include egg yolk and liver.[61] Immune system health has been shown to decline in aging dogs. The ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids plays an important role in providing optimal health.[62] Vitamin E can be used as an antioxidant in senior dog foods.[62] Pre- and probiotics can also be added to senior dog foods to help improve the beneficial bacteria in the gut, providing support for the immune system.[63] Low-protein[edit] According to The Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) nutrient guideline for cats and dogs, the minimum protein requirement for dogs during adult maintenance is 18% on a dry matter (DM) basis.[64] Other parts of the world would have a guideline similar to AAFCO. The European Pet Food Federation (FEDIAF) also stated a minimum of 18%.[65] AAFCO only provided a minimum, but majority of the diets found on the market contain a protein level exceeding the minimum. Some diets have a protein level lower than others (such as 18-20%). These low-protein diets would not be seen with growth and reproductive life stages because of their higher demand for protein, as such, these diets are for dogs meeting maintenance levels.[64] They can be purchased, such as vegetarian, vegan, weight control, and senior diets. Furthermore, this protein requirement varies from species to species. Disadvantages[edit] There is an increasing risk of the practice of coprophagy when providing low-protein diets to dogs; a negative correlation exists between the amount of protein fed and the occurrence of coprophagy.[66] Maintenance needs should still be met by low-protein diets, and the muscle turnover (i.e. synthesis and breakdown) will also remain at an optimal rate, as long as the amino acid intake remains balanced and there are no limiting amino acids.[66] There is a greater opportunity for amino acids to balance in diets containing more protein.[37] Advantages[edit] The dog's simple gastrointestinal tract contains a vast array of microbial populations; some members of this very diversified community include Fusobacteriota, Pseudomonadota, and Actinomycetota.[67] The gut microbiota of the dog will be comparable to that of the owners due to similar environmental impacts. Not only are the microbes influenced by the dog's environment, but they are also affected by the macronutrient content of the dog's diet.[67] The populations present and health status of the microbiota found within the gut can alter the physiological and metabolic functions of the dog, which then subsequently affects susceptibility to disease development.[67] Fermentation and digestion in the hindgut of a dog can potentially be improved depending on the source and the concentration of protein provide in a diet. Greater digestibility due to higher quality ingredients, in addition to lower protein concentrations within a diet, will help promote beneficial outcomes in assisting the health of a dog's gastrointestinal tract.[68] Higher protein entering the gut will lead to more putrefaction that give rise to various toxins including carcinogens and increase the chances of many bowel diseases, such as colorectal cancer.[69] The age of dogs and cats is inversely proportional to protein consumption.[70] As they age, the protein requirement decreases due to lower level of pepsin in their stomachs.[70] There has also been discussion about higher protein content in diets being inversely related with lifespan (i.e. negative relationship), where lower protein content diets were related to longer lifespans.[66] Hypoallergenic[edit] Dogs are prone to have adverse allergic reactions to food similar to human beings. The most common symptoms of food allergies in dogs include rashes, swelling, itchy or tender skin, and gastrointestinal upsets such as uncontrollable bowel movements and soft stools.[71] Certain ingredients in dog food can elicit these allergic reactions. Specifically, the reactions are understood to be initiated by the protein ingredients in dog food, with sources such as beef, chicken, soy, and turkey being common causes of these allergic reactions.[72][73] A number of "novel protein" dog foods are available that claim to alleviate such allergies in dogs.[74] Hypoallergenic diets for dogs with food allergies consist of either limited ingredients,[75] novel proteins,[72] or hydrolyzed proteins.[76] Limited ingredients make it possible to identify the suspected allergens causing these allergic reactions, as well as making it easy to avoid multiple ingredients if a canine is allergic to more than one.[75] In novel protein recipes, manufacturers use ingredients which are less likely to cause allergic reactions in dogs such as lamb, fish, and rice.[72] Hydrolyzed proteins do not come from a novel source; they could originate from chicken or soy for example. Hydrolyzed proteins become novel when they are broken apart into unrecognizable versions of themselves, making them novel to allergic gastrointestinal tracts.[76] Grain-free and low-carbohydrate[edit] Some dog food products differentiate themselves as grain- or carbohydrate-free to offer the consumer an alternative, claiming carbohydrates in pet foods to be fillers with little or no nutritional value. A study published in Nature suggests that domestic dogs' ability to easily metabolize carbohydrates may be a key difference between wolves and dogs.[77] Some consumers and manufacturers say dogs perform better on grain-free diets, while some veterinarians doubt this for a lack of scientific evidence.[78] In 2019, a study comparing dry dog food that was manufactured in the United States found that 75% of food containing feed grade grains also contained measurable levels of various mycotoxins (discussed below), while none of the grain-free dry diets tested had any detectable levels of mycotoxins. Feed grade (lower quality grade) grains that are allowed to spoil and become moldy are the suspected source of the mycotoxins.[79] This is the first published study to show a potential health benefit to feeding grain-free commercial dry pet foods. In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration identified 16 dog food brands linked to canine heart disease. The FDA has investigated more than 500 cases of dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs eating food marketed as grain-free. The 16 brands are: Acana, Zignature, Taste of the Wild, 4Health, Earthborn Holistic, Blue Buffalo, Nature's Domain, Fromm, Merrick, California Natural, Natural Balance, Orijen, Nature's Variety, NutriSource, Nutro, and Rachael Ray Nutrish. These brands are labeled as "grain-free" and list peas, lentils, or potatoes as the main ingredient. The top three brands associated with reports of cardiomyopathy are Acana with 67 reports, Zignature with 64, and Taste of the Wild with 53 reports.[80][81] Vegetarian and vegan[edit] Main article: Vegetarian and vegan dog diet Like the human practice of veganism, vegan dog foods are those formulated with the exclusion of ingredients that contain or were processed with any part of an animal, or any animal byproduct.[82] Research shows that dogs can remain healthy on a vegetarian diet.[83][84] The omnivorous domestic canine has evolved to metabolize carbohydrates and thrive on a diet lower in protein, and a vegan diet may be adequate if properly formulated and balanced.[84] Popularity of this diet has grown with a corresponding increase in people practicing vegetarianism and veganism as well as with growing concerns about environmental issues such as climate change or awareness of the large environmental impacts of animal agriculture.[83] Vegetarian dog foods are produced to either assuage a pet owner's ethical concerns or for animals with extreme allergies.[2][83] Due to the exclusion of animal products and by-products, which are primary ingredients of conventional dog food, many nutrients that would otherwise be provided by animal products need to be provided by replacement, plant-based ingredients.[84] While both animal and plant products offer a wide range of macro and micronutrients, strategic formulation of plant ingredients should be considered to meet nutritional requirements, as different nutrients are more abundant in different plant sources.[85] Despite the large differences in ingredient sourcing, studies have demonstrated that a plant-based diet can be just as edible and palatable as animal-based diets for dogs.[85] There are now various commercial vegetarian and vegan diets available on the market.[84] Special considerations Some nutrients that require special consideration include protein, calcium, vitamin D, vitamin B12, taurine, L-carnitine, and omega-3 fatty acids, particularly DHA and EPA. Although their sources are more limited without animal products, it is possible to formulate a diet adequate in these nutrients through plant and synthetic sources.[85] A review recommends a cautious approach to vegan dog food given "the lack of large population-based studies" as of 2023 and that commercial foods are used if guardians wish to implement a vegan diet.[83] Potential risks in feeding a plant-based diet include alkaline urine and nutrient inadequacy, especially in homemade diets.[86][85] Adherence to recommendations by reliable sources is strongly advised. Nutrients and supplements[edit] See also: Cat food § Nutrients and supplements The requirements and functions of nutrients in dogs are largely similar to those in cats, with many requirements relaxed: The requirement of arginine in the urea cycle is reduced, as dogs have a functional pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase.[87] Dogs have a functional delta 6 desaturase, hence no specific need for arachidonic acid.[60] Dogs have a functional sulfinoalanine decarboxylase, hence no need for taurine.[88] Unlike cats, dogs and humans can use Vitamin D2 nearly as efficiently as they use Vitamin D3.[89] Chart[edit] This section may lack focus or may be about more than one topic. In particular, need to replace cat functions and symptoms with dog information. Please help improve this article, possibly by splitting the article and/or by introducing a disambiguation page, or discuss this issue on the talk page. (November 2020) Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) Dog Food Nutrient Profiles,[a] 2014[90] with Role of Vitamins & Minerals [91] Nutrient Units(DryMatter Basis) Growth andreproductionminimum Adultmaintenanceminimum[b] Maximum Functions Signs of deficiency/Excess Protein % 22.5 18.0 Arginine % 1.0 0.51 Deficiency Hyperammonemia Symptoms include lethargy, vomiting, ataxia, hyperesthesia and can be serious enough to induce death and coma[92] Histidine % 0.44 0.19 Isoleucine % 0.71 0.38 Leucine % 1.29 0.68 Lysine % 0.90 0.63 Methionine + cystine % 0.70 0.65 Methionine % 0.35 0.33 Phenylalanine + tyrosine % 1.30 0.74 Phenylalanine % 0.83 0.45 Threonine % 1.04 0.48 Tryptophan % 0.20 0.16 Valine % 0.68 0.49 Fat [c] % 8.5 5.5 Linoleic acid % 1.3 1.1 alpha-Linolenic acid % 0.08 ND EPA + DHA % 0.05 ND ω-6:ω-3 ratio 30:1 Minerals Calcium % 1.2 0.5 1.8 Formation of bones and teeth Blood coagulation Nerve impulse transmission Muscle contraction Cell signaling Deficiency Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism loss of bone mineral content, which can lead to collapse and curvature of lumbar vertebrae and pelvic bones bone pain, which can progress to pathological fractures Excess Depressed food intake Decreased growth Increased bone mineral density Increased need for magnesium Phosphorus % 1.0 0.4 1.6 Skeletal structure DNA and RNA structure Energy metabolism Locomotion Acid-base balance Deficiency Hemolytic anemia Locomotor disturbances Metabolic acidosis Ca:P ratio 1:1 1:1 2:1 Potassium % 0.6 0.6 Acid-base balance Nerve-impulse transmission Enzymatic reactions Transport functions Deficiency Anorexia Retarded growth Neurological disorders, including ataxia and severe muscle weakness Sodium % 0.3 0.08 Acid-base balance Regulation of osmotic pressure Nerve impulse generation and transmission Deficiency Anorexia Impaired growth Excessive thirst and drinking Excessive urination Chloride % 0.45 0.12 Acid-base balance Osmolarity of extracellular fluids Deficiency Increased sodium concentration in renal fluid Excess potassium excretion Magnesium % 0.06 0.06 Enzyme functions Muscle and nerve-cell membrane stability Hormone secretion and function Mineral structure of bones and teeth Deficiency Poor growth Overextension of the carpal joints Muscle twitching Convulsions Excess Urinary tract stone formation in the presence of high pH Iron [d] mg/kg 88 40 Hemoglobin and myoglobin synthesis Energy metabolism Deficiency Poor growth Pale mucous membranes Lethargy Weakness Diarrhea Excess Vomiting and diarrhea Copper [e] mg/kg 12.4 7.3 Connective tissue formation Iron metabolism Blood cell formation Melanin pigment formation Myelin formation Defense against oxidative damage Deficiency Reduced weight gain Longer time to conceive Manganese mg/kg 7.2 5.0 Enzyme functions Bone development Neurological function No studies of deficiency in cats Zinc mg/kg 100 80 1000 (removed in 2014)[93] Enzyme reactions Cell replication Protein and carbohydrate metabolism Skin function Wound healing Deficiency Skin lesions Growth retardation Testicular damage Iodine mg/kg 1.0 1.0 11 Thyroid hormone synthesis Cell differentiation Growth and development of puppies Regulation of metabolic rate Deficiency Enlargement of thyroid glands Excess Excessive tearing, salivation, and nasal discharge Dandruff Selenium mg/kg 0.35 0.35 2 Defense against oxidative damage Immune response No studies of deficiency in cats Vitamins Vitamin A IU/kg 5000 5000 250,000 Vision Growth Immune function Fetal development Cellular differentiation Transmembrane protein transfer Deficiency Conjunctivitis Cataracts, retinal degeneration, and other eye problems Weight loss Muscle weakness Reproductive and developmental disorders Excess Skeletal lesions in kittens, particularly outgrowths of the cervical vertebrae Osteoporosis Vitamin D IU/kg 500 500 3,000 Maintenance of mineral status Skeletal structure Muscle contraction Blood clotting Nerve conduction Cell signaling Phosphorus balance Deficiency Rickets Abnormalities in skeletal development Progressive paralysis Ataxia Lack of grooming Reduction in body weight and food intake Excess Anorexia Vomiting Lethargy Calcification of soft tissues Vitamin E [f] IU/kg 50 50 Defense against oxidative damage via free radical scavenging Deficiency Anorexia Depression Pain sensitivity in abdomen Fat tissue pathology Vitamin B1 / Thiamine [g] mg/kg 2.25 2.25 Energy and carbohydrate metabolism Activation of ion channels in neural tissue Deficiency Neurological impairments including altered reflexes and convulsive seizures Heart-rate disorders Pathological changes in the central nervous system Severe learning deficits Riboflavin mg/kg 5.2 5.2 Enzyme functions Deficiency Cataracts Fatty livers Testicular atrophy Pantothenic acid mg/kg 12 12 Energy metabolism Deficiency Stunted growth Fatty changes in liver Small bowel lesions Niacin mg/kg 13.6 13.6 Enzyme functions Deficiency Anorexia Weight loss Elevated body temperature Fiery red tongue, with ulceration and congestion Vitamin B6 / Pyridoxine mg/kg 1.5 1.5 Glucose generation Red blood cell function Niacin synthesis Nervous system function Immune response Hormone regulation Gene activation Deficiency Stunted growth Convulsive seizures Kidney lesions Folic Acid mg/kg 0.216 0.216 Amino acid and nucleotide metabolism Mitochondrial protein synthesis Deficiency Decreased growth rate increased iron levels in blood Vitamin B12 mg/kg 0.028 0.028 Enzyme functions Deficiency Weight loss Vomiting Diarrhea Intestinal disorders Choline mg/kg 1360 1360 Deficiency Fatty liver in kittens[94] Lower motivation to eat in kittens[94] Decreased growth rate in kittens[94] ^ Presumes an energy density of 4.0 kcal/g ME, based on the modified Atwater values of 3.5, 8.5, and 3.5 kcal/g for protein, fat, and carbohydrate (nitrogen-free extract, NFE), respectively [Regulation PF9]. Rations greater than 4.5 kcal/g should be corrected for energy density; rations less than 4.0 kcal/g should not be corrected for energy. ^ Recommended concentrations for maintenance of body weight at an average caloric intake for dogs of a given optimal weight. ^ Although a true requirement for fat per se has not been established, the minimum level was based on recognition of fat as a source of essential fatty acids, as a carrier of fat-soluble vitamins, to enhance palatability, and to supply an adequate caloric density. ^ Average apparent digestibility for iron associated with recommended minimums is 20% of that consumed. Because of very poor bioavailability, iron from carbonate or oxide sources that are added to the diet should not be considered as components in meeting the minimum nutrient level. ^ Because of very poor bioavailability, copper from oxide sources that are added to the diet should not be considered as components in meeting the minimum nutrient level. ^ It is recommended that the ratio of IU of vitamin E to grams of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) be >0.6:1. A diet containing 50 IU of vitamin E will have a ratio of >0.6:1 when the PUFA content is 83 grams or less. Diets containing more than 83 grams of PUFA should contain an additional 0.6 IU of vitamin E for every gram of PUFA. ^ Because processing may destroy up to 90% of the thiamine in the diet, allowance in formulation should be made to ensure the minimum nutrient level is met after processing. The European Union does not use a unified nutrient requirement.[95] A manufacturer committee called FEDIAF (European Pet Food Industry Federation) makes recommendations for cats and dogs that members follow.[96] Both AAFCO and FEDIAF publish in two formats: one in the amount-per-kilogram form above, another in an energy-ratio format.[90] Dangers[edit] Main article: Dog health § Dangerous foods A number of common human foods and household ingestibles are toxic to dogs, including chocolate solids (theobromine poisoning), onion and garlic (thiosulfate, alliin or allyl propyl disulfide poisoning[97]), grapes and raisins (cause kidney failure in dogs), milk (some dogs are lactose intolerant and suffer diarrhea; goats' milk can be beneficial to dogs), mushrooms, fatty foods, rhubarb, xylitol,[98] macadamia nuts, as well as various plants and other potentially ingested materials.[99][100] A full list of poison/toxic substances can be found on the ASPCA's website.[101] Recalls[edit] Dog food at a supermarket in Brooklyn, New York. Main article: 2007 pet food recalls The 2007 pet food recalls involved the massive recall of many brands of cat and dog foods beginning in March 2007.[102] The recalls came in response to reports of renal failure in pets consuming mostly wet pet foods made with wheat gluten from a single Chinese company, beginning in February 2007. After more than three weeks of complaints from consumers, the recall began voluntarily with the Canadian company Menu Foods on March 16, 2007, when a company test showed sickness and death in some of the test animals. Overall, several major companies recalled more than 100 brands of pet foods, with most of the recalled product coming from Menu Foods. The contaminant was identified as melamine,[103][104][105][106][107] which had been added as an adulterant to simulate a higher protein content. In the United States, there has been extensive media coverage of the recall. There have been calls for government regulation of pet foods[by whom?], which had previously been self-regulated by pet food manufacturers. The economic impact on the pet food market has been extensive, with Menu Foods losing roughly $30 million alone from the recall. Contaminants[edit] Mycotoxins[edit] In April 2014, aflatoxin B1, a known carcinogenic toxin, melamine, and cyanuric acid were all found in various brands of USA pet food imported into Hong Kong. Since 1993, the FDA has confirmed concerns of toxins in feed grade (animal grade) ingredients, yet to date no comprehensive federal regulation exists on mycotoxin testing in feed grade (animal grade) ingredients used to make pet food.[108] In 1997, the Journal of Food Additives and Contaminants established that low levels of various mycotoxins could cause health concerns in pets, and was found in feed grade ingredients.[109] A study published in the Journal of Food Protection in 2001 cited concerns regarding fungi (the source of mycotoxins) in commercial pet foods and warned about the "risk for animal health".[110] In 2006, a study published in the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry confirmed mycotoxins in pet foods around the world and concluded that contamination of mycotoxins in pet foods can lead to chronic effects on the health of pets.[111] In 2007, the International Journal of Food Microbiology published a study that claimed "mycotoxin contamination in pet food poses a serious health threat to pets", and listed them: aflatoxins, ochratoxins, trichothecenes, zearalenone, fumonisins and fusaric acid.[112] A 2008 study published in the Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition found high levels of mycotoxins in the raw ingredients used for pet food in Brazil.[113] A 2010 study in the Journal of Mycotoxin Research tested 26 commercial dog foods and found mycotoxins at concerning sub-lethal levels. It was determined that long-term exposure to low levels of confirmed mycotoxins could pose chronic health risks.[114] For all the above reasons, a trend away from feed ingredients and toward USDA-certified ingredients fit for human consumption has developed.[115] In 1999, another fungal toxin triggered the recall of dry dog food made by Doane Pet Care at one of its plants, including Ol' Roy, Wal-Mart's brand, as well as 53 other brands. This time the toxin killed 25 dogs.[116] A 2005 consumer alert was released for contaminated Diamond Pet Foods for dogs and cats. Over 100 canine deaths and at least one feline fatality have been linked to Diamond Pet Foods contaminated by potentially deadly aflatoxin, according to Cornell University veterinarians.[117] Salmonella and copper[edit] The FDA released a video focusing on another major threat in commercial pet food: Salmonella bacterial contamination. They also cite other major toxins of concern.[118] The video references the case of a specific commercial pet food plant that was also the subject of a March 2014 study published in the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. It details how at least 53 known human illnesses were linked to commercial pet foods made at that plant in 2012.[119] A class action lawsuit linked to this outbreak was settled in 2014.[120] The video also cites the dangers of over supplementation of nutrients in pet food. A study published in the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association in February 2013 suggested a correlation between liver disease and the amount of copper supplementation in AAFCO diets.[121] In popular culture[edit] Eating your own dog food or dogfooding is the practice of using your own products or services.[122][123][124] See also[edit] Cat food Dental health diets for dogs Dog food brands Dog biscuits Dog meat Dog odor Hypoallergenic dog food Pet store Puppy nutrition Senior dog diet References[edit] ^ a b Axelsson, E.; Ratnakumar, A.; Arendt, M.L.; Maqbool, K.; Webster, M.T.; Perloski, M.; Liberg, O.; Arnemo, J.M.; Hedhammar, Å.; Lindblad-Toh, K. (2013). "The genomic signature of dog domestication reveals adaptation to a starch-rich diet". Nature. 495 (7441): 360–364. Bibcode:2013Natur.495..360A. doi:10.1038/nature11837. PMID 23354050. S2CID 4415412. ^ a b Arendt, M; Cairns, K M; Ballard, J W O; Savolainen, P; Axelsson, E (13 July 2016). "Diet adaptation in dog reflects spread of prehistoric agriculture". Heredity. 117 (5): 301–306. doi:10.1038/hdy.2016.48. PMC 5061917. PMID 27406651. ^ Pajic, Petar; Pavlidis, Pavlos; Dean, Kirsten; Neznanova, Lubov; Romano, Rose-Anne; Garneau, Danielle; Daugherity, Erin; Globig, Anja; Ruhl, Stefan; Gokcumen, Omer (14 May 2019). "Independent amylase gene copy number bursts correlate with dietary preferences in mammals". eLife. 8. doi:10.7554/eLife.44628. PMC 6516957. PMID 31084707. Mareike C Janiak (May 14, 2019). "Evolution: Of starch and spit". eLife. ^ "Did Eating Human Poop Play a Role in the Evolution of Dogs? | Psychology Today". ^ Song, Hee Seok; Kim, Young Ae (March 2021). "A dog food recommendation system based on nutrient suitability". Expert Systems. 38 (2). doi:10.1111/exsy.12623. ISSN 0266-4720. S2CID 225422919. ^ "Dog Food in the US". Euromonitor.com. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. ^ Virgil (6 December 2017). "Bucolica, Georgica, et Aeneis: accedunt clavis metrica, notulae Anglicae, et quaestiones". Hilliard, Gray, Little et Wilkins. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ "Columella: de Re Rustica VII". Thelatinlibrary.com. Archived from the original on 2015-04-26. Retrieved 2015-03-16. ^ Darmesteter, James; Mills, Lawrence Heyworth (6 December 1895). "The Zend-Avesta: The Vendîdâd, translated by James Darmesteter". Clarendon Press. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 16 March 2015 – via Google Books. ^ de), Fr Girard (Viuda (6 December 2017). "Nouveau dictionnaire universel des arts et des sciencies: françois, latin et anglois..." chez la Veuve de Fr. Girard. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ "Denis Diderot, Jean Le Rond d' Alembert, Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences ..., Volume 35, Part 1". 1781. Retrieved 2016-10-21. ^ Boyard, Nicolas Jean Baptiste (1844). "Nicolas Jean Baptiste Boyard, Manuel du bouvier et zoophile: ou l'art d'élever de soigner les animaux 1844, 327". Archived from the original on 2020-08-19. Retrieved 2018-10-02. ^ "The Sportsman's Dictionary; Or, The Gentleman's Companion: for Town and Country: Containing Full and Particular Instructions for Riding, Hunting, Fowling ... Hawking, &c. With the Various Methods to be Observed in Breeding and Dieting of Horses Both for the Road and Turf; Also, the Management of Dogs, Gamecocks, Dunghill-fowls, Turkies, Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, Singing-birds, &c. And the Manner of Curing Their Various Diseases and Accidents". G.G.J. and J. Robinson. 6 December 1785. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ Lawrence, Richard (6 December 2017). "The Complete Farrier, and British Sportsman: Containing a Systematic Enquiry Into the Structure and Animal Economy of the Horse, the Causes, Symptoms, and Most-approved Methods of Prevention and Cure for Every Disease to which He is Liable ... with Numerous ... Recipes for Various Diseases. ... Including a ... Declineation of the ... Dogs Used in the Sports of the Field, with Canine Pathology. With an Appendix, Containing a Minute Anatomical Description of the ... Skeleton of the Horse; the ... Muscles ... and the Different Viscera". W. Clowes for T. Kelly. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ "The Best Dog Food for Small Dogs". allsmalldogs.org. December 21, 2013. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2016. ^ "Outing: Sport, Adventure, Travel, Fiction". W. B. Holland. 6 December 1890. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ Forrest, Susanna (8 June 2017). "The Troubled History of Horse Meat in America". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 15 March 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2020. ^ "History of Pet Food". sojos.com. Archived from the original on 2011-08-29. Retrieved 2011-09-10. ^ Galera, Leonardo de Aro; Abdalla Filho, Adibe Luiz; Reis, Luiza Santos; Souza, Janaina Leite de; Hernandez, Yeleine Almoza; Martinelli, Luiz Antonio (2019). "Carbon and nitrogen isotopic composition of commercial dog food in Brazil". PeerJ. 7: e5828. doi:10.7717/peerj.5828. PMC 6387582. PMID 30809425. ^ a b "Pet Foods - Diet Types | PetDiets". www.petdiets.com. Archived from the original on 2019-11-17. Retrieved 2019-11-17. ^ MacNamara, John P. Principles of Companion Animal Nutrition. 2006. New Jersey: Pearson/Prentice Hall. ^ Elsey, J.; Riepenhausen, J.; McKay, B.; Barton, G.W.; Willis, M. (1997). "Modeling and Control of a Food Extrusion Process". Computers Chem Engng. 21 (1–2): S361–S366. doi:10.1016/s0098-1354(97)00075-6. ^ Pitchon, E. (1980). United States Patent No. 4225630. Flushing, New York:United States Patent Office. ^ Fascetti, Andrea (October 2003). "Taurine deficiency in dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 223 (8): 1137–1141. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.223.1137. PMID 14584743. ^ Pion, Paul (1992). "Dilated Cardiomyopathy Associated with Taurine Deficiency in the Domestic Cat: Relationship to Diet and Myocardial Taurine Content". Taurine. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology. Vol. 315. pp. 63–73. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-3436-5_8. ISBN 978-1-4613-6520-4. PMID 1387282. ^ Spitze, AR (2003). "Taurine concentrations in animla feed ingredients; cooking influences taurine content" (PDF). Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition. 87 (7–8): 251–262. doi:10.1046/j.1439-0396.2003.00434.x. PMID 12864905. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2014. ^ Messonnier, S. (2001) Natural Health Bible for Dogs & Cats. New York: Three Rivers Press. ISBN 0-7615-2673-0 ^ Bohart, G.S. (1934). United States Patent No. 1961681. Washington, D.C.:United States Patent Office. ^ a b c d e f g Baker, G.J., Bansal, A.K., Konieczka, J.L. and Kuntz, D.A. (1990). United States Patent No. 4895731. Chicago, Illinois: United States Patent Office. ^ Taylor, Jessica (2013-09-26). "How to: Apply human food trends to petfood". Petfoodindustry.com. Archived from the original on 2012-11-09. Retrieved 2014-08-10. ^ "Making Homemade dog food recipes". Archived from the original on 2013-05-11. Retrieved 2013-03-27. ^ "The Dog Food Project - Ingredients to avoid". Dogfoodproject.com. Archived from the original on 2009-01-16. Retrieved 2009-01-31. ^ "The Pet Food Ingredient Game - Wysong". Wysong.net. Archived from the original on 2012-08-23. Retrieved 2012-08-13. ^ "An excerpt from the book "Food Pets Die For"". Homevet.com. Archived from the original on 2007-06-21. Retrieved 2007-10-25. ^ the Association of American Feed Control Officials Archived January 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Canada Wraps Up BSE Investigation Archived November 27, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d Case, Linda P (2011). Canine and feline nutrition: a resource for companion animal professionals. Maryland Heights, Mo.: Mosby. ISBN 9780323066198. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-12-05. ^ Hilton, J.W.; Atkinson, J.L. (January 1988). "High Lipid and High Protein Dog Foods". The Canadian Veterinary Journal. 29 (1): 76–78. ISSN 0008-5286. PMC 1680747. PMID 17422957. ^ Dehkordi, N.; Rao, R.; Sakhanokho, H.; Zipf, A. (2003). "Nutrient Intake in Adults 50 Years Age and Older in the United States". Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 103: 26. doi:10.1016/S0002-8223(08)70041-5. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-29. ^ Sepowitz, John J.; McClung, Holly L.; Berryman, Claire E.; Armstrong, Nicholes J.; Ferrando, Arny A.; Lieberman, Harris R.; McClung, James P.; Pasiakos, Stefan M. (May 2016). "Supplementing An Energy Adequate High Protein Diet With Additional Protein Is Not Necessary For Recovery Of Lean Body Mass After Short-term Starvation: 1609 Board #262 June 2, 800 AM - 930 AM". Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. 48 (5S): 443. doi:10.1249/01.mss.0000486334.23548.c5. ISSN 0195-9131. S2CID 2730636. ^ Peterson, Mark D.; Sen, Ananda; Gordon, Paul M. (February 2011). "Influence of resistance exercise on lean body mass in aging adults: a meta-analysis". Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 43 (2): 249–258. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181eb6265. ISSN 1530-0315. PMC 2995836. PMID 20543750. ^ Federal Drug Administration. (2018, March 23). "Complete and Balanced" Pet Food. Retrieved May 31, 2018, from https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/animal-health-literacy/complete-and-balanced-pet-food ^ "Alternative Feeding Practices". World Small Animal Veterinary Association. 2001. Archived from the original on 2008-02-12. Retrieved 2008-02-24. ^ DACVN, Cailin R. Heinze, VMD, MS; DACVN, Cailin R. Heinze, VMD, MS (2019-02-15). "Human Grade: Should pets eat the same food that we do?". Clinical Nutrition Service at Cummings School. Archived from the original on 2019-11-18. Retrieved 2019-11-18.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Medicine, Center for Veterinary (2019-04-15). "Information on Marketing a Pet Food Product". FDA. Archived from the original on 2019-12-12. Retrieved 2019-12-16. ^ a b Schlesinger, Daniel P.; Joffe, Daniel J. (2011). "Raw food diets in companion animals: A critical review". The Canadian Veterinary Journal. 52 (1): 50–54. ISSN 0008-5286. PMC 3003575. PMID 21461207. ^ Harper, Amelie (2011-06-11). "Raw Feeding Dogs – Handling Raw Dog Food At Home". Raw feeding. Archived from the original on 2020-09-18. Retrieved 2017-03-24. ^ "Worried about tainted jerky treats?". Orange County Register. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 16 April 2014. ^ Taylor, Jessica (2013-09-26). "Just Food for thought". Petfoodindustry.com. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2014-08-10. ^ "High-Pressure Processing and Raw Pet Food Diets: What You Need to Know". Petmd.com. Archived from the original on 2017-11-24. Retrieved 2017-11-27. ^ a b Michel, Kathryn E. (2006). "Unconventional Diets for Dogs and Cats". Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice. 36 (6): 1269–1281. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2006.08.003. PMID 17085234. ^ Laflamme, Dorthy (May 2005). "Nutrition for Aging Cats and Dogs and the Importance of Body Condition". Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice. 35 (3): 713–742. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2004.12.011. PMID 15833567. ^ Churchill, J.A. (2015). "Nutrition for senior dogs: New tricks for feeding old dogs" (PDF). Clinicians Brief. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-10-10. Retrieved 2017-11-28. ^ Neil, Kirsten M.; Caron, John P.; Orth, Michael W. (2005). "The role of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate in treatment for and prevention of osteoarthritis in animals". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 226 (7): 1079–1088. doi:10.2460/javma.2005.226.1079. PMID 15825732. ^ Case, Linda P.; et al. (2011). Canine and feline nutrition: a resource for companion animal professionals (3rd ed.). Maryland Heights, Mo.: Mosby. ISBN 9780323066198. OCLC 664112342. ^ Adolphe, Jennifer; Fitzpatrick, Kelley. "FLAXSEED: Nutrition Benefits for Dogs and Cats" (PDF). Flax Council of Canada. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-11-01. Retrieved 2017-11-28. ^ Swanson KS, Grieshop CM, Flickinger EA, Bauer LL, Healy HP, Dawson KA, Merchen NR, Fahey GG Jr (May 2002). "Supplemental fructooligosaccharides and mannanoligosaccharides influence immune function, ileal and total tract nutrient digestibilities, microbial populations and concentrations of protein catabolites in the large bowel of dogs". The Journal of Nutrition. 132 (5): 980–989. doi:10.1093/jn/132.5.980. PMID 11983825. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-28. ^ a b c Roudebush, Philip; Zicker, Steven C.; Cotman, Carl W.; Milgram, Norton W.; Muggenburg, Bruce A.; Head, Elizabeth (2005-09-01). "Nutritional management of brain aging in dogs". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 227 (5): 722–728. doi:10.2460/javma.2005.227.722. ISSN 0003-1488. PMID 16178393. ^ Straus M (November 2012). "Plant oils: do you know which plant oils may help your dog, and which ones could cause problems?". Whole Dog Journal. 15: 16. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-29. ^ a b Watson, Tim D. G. (1998-12-01). "Diet and Skin Disease in Dogs and Cats". The Journal of Nutrition. 128 (12): 2783S–2789S. doi:10.1093/jn/128.12.2783S. ISSN 0022-3166. PMID 9868266. ^ "Common pet food ingredients" (PDF). Skaer Veterinary. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-04-18. Retrieved 2017-11-29. ^ a b Wander RC, Hall JA, Gradin JL, Shi-Hua D, Jewell DE (June 1997). "The ratio of dietary (n-6) to (n-3) fatty acids influences immune system function, eicosanoid metabolism, Lipid peroxidation and vitamin E status in aged dogs". The Journal of Nutrition. 127 (6): 1198–1205. doi:10.1093/jn/127.6.1198. PMID 9187636. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-29. ^ Kau, Andrew L.; Ahern, Philip P.; Griffin, Nicholas W.; Goodman, Andrew L.; Gordon, Jeffrey I. (2011-06-15). "Human nutrition, the gut microbiome and the immune system". Nature. 474 (7351): 327–336. doi:10.1038/nature10213. ISSN 1476-4687. PMC 3298082. PMID 21677749. ^ a b "The Association of American Feed Control Officials > Home". Aafco.org. Archived from the original on 2020-08-17. Retrieved 2017-12-05. ^ "Nutrition". Fediaf.org. Archived from the original on 2017-12-06. Retrieved 2017-12-05. ^ a b c J. France and E. Kebreab (2008). Mathematical Modelling in Animal Nutrition. Canada: CABI. ISBN 9781845933593. ^ a b c Swanson, K. S. (2016-10-01). "0226 Dietary manipulation of canine and feline gut microbiome". Journal of Animal Science. 94 (supplement5): 107. doi:10.2527/jam2016-0226. ISSN 1525-3163. Archived from the original on 2017-12-06. Retrieved 2017-12-05. ^ Nery, J.; Goudez, R.; Biourge, V.; Tournier, C.; Leray, V.; Martin, L.; Thorin, C.; Nguyen, P.; Dumon, H. (August 2012). "Influence of dietary protein content and source on colonic fermentative activity in dogs differing in body size and digestive tolerance" (PDF). Journal of Animal Science. 90 (8): 2570–2580. doi:10.2527/jas.2011-4112. hdl:2318/94132. ISSN 1525-3163. PMID 22328724. ^ Conlon, Michael A.; Bird, Anthony R. (2014-12-24). "The Impact of Diet and Lifestyle on Gut Microbiota and Human Health". Nutrients. 7 (1): 17–44. doi:10.3390/nu7010017. ISSN 2072-6643. PMC 4303825. PMID 25545101. ^ a b Fahey, George C.; Barry, Kathleen A.; Swanson, Kelly S. (2008). "Age-related changes in nutrient utilization by companion animals". Annual Review of Nutrition. 28: 425–445. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.28.061807.155325. ISSN 0199-9885. PMID 18598137. ^ Favrot, Claude (2016). "Diagnosis of canine atopic dermatitis (including food allergy)" (PDF). World Congress of Veterinary Dermatology. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-12-01. Retrieved 2017-11-30 – via ZORA. ^ a b c Kennis, Robert, A. (2006). "Food Allergies: Update of Pathogenesis, Diagnoses, and Management". Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice. 36 (1): 175–184. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2005.09.012. PMID 16364783.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Jensen-Jarolim, Erika (2017). Comparative Medicine: Disorders Linking Humans with their Animals. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. p. 121. ISBN 978-3-319-47007-8. ^ Dodds, W. Jean (2015). Canine Nutrigenomics: The New Science of Feeding Your Dog for Optimum Health. Dogwise Publishing. ^ a b Verlindin A, Hesta M, Millet S, Janssens GP (2007). "Food Allergy in Dogs and Cats: A review". Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 46 (3): 259–273. doi:10.1080/10408390591001117. PMID 16527756. S2CID 32026297. ^ a b Cave, Nicholas, J (2006). "Hydrolyzed Protein Diets for Dogs and Cats". Veterinary Clinics Small Animal Practice. 36 (6): 1251–1268. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2006.08.008. PMID 17085233.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Mestel, Rosie (2013-01-23). "Carbs were key in wolves' evolution into dogs". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 2013-06-29. Retrieved 2013-07-08. ^ "FDA names 16 brands of dog food linked to canine heart disease". NBC News. Archived from the original on 2019-11-18. Retrieved 2019-11-19. ^ Tegzes, John H.; Oakley, Brian B.; Brennan, Greg (January 2019). "Comparison of mycotoxin concentrations in grain versus grain-free dry and wet commercial dog foods". Toxicology Communications. 3 (1): 61–66. doi:10.1080/24734306.2019.1648636. ISSN 2473-4306. ^ "FDA Identifies 16 Dog Food Brands Linked to Canine Heart Disease". July 2019. Archived from the original on 2019-07-19. Retrieved 2019-07-19. ^ Garcia, Sandra E. (2019-06-29). "F.D.A. Names 16 Brands of Dog Food That May Be Linked to Canine Heart Disease (Published 2019)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2021-05-16. Retrieved 2021-03-03. ^ Ruby, Matthew B. (February 2012). "Vegetarianism. A blossoming field of study". Appetite. 58 (1): 141–150. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2011.09.019. ISSN 1095-8304. PMID 22001025. S2CID 30991920. ^ a b c d Domínguez-Oliva, Adriana; Mota-Rojas, Daniel; Semendric, Ines; Whittaker, Alexandra L. (January 2023). "The Impact of Vegan Diets on Indicators of Health in Dogs and Cats: A Systematic Review". Veterinary Sciences. 10 (1): 52. doi:10.3390/vetsci10010052. ISSN 2306-7381. PMC 9860667. PMID 36669053. ^ a b c d Knight, Andrew; Leitsberger, Madelaine (2016-09-21). "Vegetarian versus Meat-Based Diets for Companion Animals". Animals. 6 (9): 57. doi:10.3390/ani6090057. PMC 5035952. PMID 27657139. ^ a b c d McEvoy, Claire T.; Temple, Norman; Woodside, Jayne V. (December 2012). "Vegetarian diets, low-meat diets and health: a review". Public Health Nutrition. 15 (12): 2287–2294. doi:10.1017/S1368980012000936. ISSN 1368-9800. PMC 10271837. PMID 22717188. ^ Kienzle, E.; Engelhard, R. (2001). "A field study on the nutrition of vegetarian dogs and cats in Europe". Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practising Veterinarian. 23 (9A): 81. ^ Rogers, QR; Phang, JM (1985). "Deficiency of pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase in the intestinal mucosa of the cat". J Nutr. 115 (1): 146–50. doi:10.1093/jn/115.1.146. PMID 3965666. ^ KNOPF, Karen (2011). "Taurine: An Essential Nutrient for the Cat". The Journal of Nutrition. 108 (5): 773–778. doi:10.1093/jn/108.5.773. PMID 641594 – via Primo. ^ Morris, J. G. (August 2002). "Cats discriminate between cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol*". Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition. 86 (7–8): 229–238. doi:10.1046/j.1439-0396.2002.00379.x. PMID 15379909. ^ a b "AAFCO methods for substantiating nutritional adequacy of dog and cat foods (proposed for 2014 publication)" (PDF). AAFCO. 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-10-22. Retrieved 2020-11-30. ^ The Role of Vitamins and Minerals in the Diet for Cats. 2006. doi:10.17226/10668. ISBN 978-0-309-08628-8. Archived from the original on 2006-09-07. Retrieved 2007-03-08. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) Note: A dog chapter should be available. If any editor is able to access the book, please adjust the article accordingly. ^ Bauer, J. E. (January 1998). "Nutritional Uniqueness of Cats". Veterinary Quarterly. 20 (sup1): S78–S79. doi:10.1080/01652176.1998.10807428. PMID 9652024. ^ David A. Dzanis (November 1997). "SELECTING NUTRITIOUS PET FOODS". INFORMATION FOR CONSUMERS. Food and Drug Administration - Center for Veterinary Medicine. Archived from the original on June 25, 2006. Retrieved 2005-01-20. ^ a b c Schaeffer, Rogers; Morris (1982). "The choline requirement of the growing kitten in the presence of just adequate dietary methionine". Nutrition Research. 2 (3): 289–299. doi:10.1016/s0271-5317(82)80010-9. ^ Global Alliance of Pet Food Associations. "How pet food is regulated" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-07-27. Retrieved 2020-11-30. ^ "Nutritional Guidelines". FEDIAF. Archived from the original on 2020-11-30. Retrieved 2020-11-30. ^ Sources vary on which of these are considered the most significant toxic item. ^ [1] Archived 2016-06-19 at the Wayback Machine, Toxic Food Guide for Pets ^ "Toxic Foods and Plants for Dogs". entirelypets.com. Archived from the original on 2010-07-23. Retrieved 2010-06-24. ^ Drs. Foster & Smith. "Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Dog". peteducation.com. Archived from the original on 2014-09-15. Retrieved 2010-06-24. ^ "People Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Pets". Aspca.org. Archived from the original on 2013-07-15. Retrieved 2017-09-20. ^ "FDA Animal Safety Recalls". FDA. 2018-11-03. Archived from the original on 2019-04-24. Retrieved 2019-12-16. ^ Cianciolo RE, Bischoff K, Ebel JG, Van Winkle TJ, Goldstein RE, Serfilippi LM (September 2008). "Clinicopathologic, histologic, and toxicologic findings in 70 cats inadvertently exposed to pet food contaminated with melamine and cyanuric acid". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 233 (5): 729–37. doi:10.2460/javma.233.5.729. PMID 18764706. ^ Thompson ME, Lewin-Smith MR, Kalasinsky VF, et al. (May 2008). "Characterization of melamine-containing and calcium oxalate crystals in three dogs with suspected pet food-induced nephrotoxicosis". Veterinary Pathology. 45 (3): 417–26. doi:10.1354/vp.45-3-417. PMID 18487505. S2CID 41007011. ^ Dobson RL, Motlagh S, Quijano M, et al. (November 2008). "Identification and characterization of toxicity of contaminants in pet food leading to an outbreak of renal toxicity in cats and dogs". Toxicological Sciences. 106 (1): 251–62. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfn160. PMID 18689873. ^ Rumbeiha WK, Agnew D, Maxie G, et al. (June 2010). "Analysis of a survey database of pet food-induced poisoning in North America". Journal of Medical Toxicology. 6 (2): 172–184. doi:10.1007/s13181-010-0022-9. PMC 3550281. PMID 20393823. ^ Cocchi M, Vascellari M, Gallina A, Agnoletti F, Angeletti R, Mutinelli F (January 2010). "Canine nephrotoxicosis induced by melamine-contaminated pet food in Italy". The Journal of Veterinary Medical Science. 72 (1): 103–7. doi:10.1292/jvms.09-0278. PMID 19915330. ^ Price WD, Lovell RA, McChesney DG (September 1993). "Naturally occurring toxins in feedstuffs: Center for Veterinary Medicine Perspective". Journal of Animal Science. 71 (9): 2556–62. doi:10.2527/1993.7192556x. PMID 8407668. ^ Scudamore KA, Hetmanski MT, Nawaz S, Naylor J, Rainbird S (1997). "Determination of mycotoxins in pet foods sold for domestic pets and wild birds using linked-column immunoassay clean-up and HPLC". Food Additives and Contaminants. 14 (2): 175–86. doi:10.1080/02652039709374512. PMID 9102350. ^ Bueno DJ, Silva JO, Oliver G (May 2001). "Mycoflora in commercial pet foods". Journal of Food Protection. 64 (5): 741–3. doi:10.4315/0362-028X-64.5.741. PMID 11348013. ^ Leung MC, Díaz-Llano G, Smith TK (December 2006). "Mycotoxins in pet food: a review on worldwide prevalence and preventative strategies". Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 54 (26): 9623–35. doi:10.1021/jf062363+. PMID 17177480. ^ Boermans HJ, Leung MC (October 2007). "Mycotoxins and the pet food industry: toxicological evidence and risk assessment". International Journal of Food Microbiology. 119 (1–2): 95–102. doi:10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2007.07.063. PMID 17889389. ^ Campos SG, Cavaglieri LR, Fernández Juri MG, et al. (June 2008). "Mycobiota and aflatoxins in raw materials and pet food in Brazil". Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition. 92 (3): 377–83. doi:10.1111/j.1439-0396.2008.00809.x. PMID 18477320. ^ Böhm J, Koinig L, Razzazi-Fazeli E, et al. (August 2010). "Survey and risk assessment of the mycotoxins deoxynivalenol, zearalenone, fumonisins, ochratoxin A, and aflatoxins in commercial dry dog food". Mycotoxin Research. 26 (3): 147–53. doi:10.1007/s12550-010-0049-4. PMID 23605379. S2CID 21833929. ^ DELL, MARYANNE (October 27, 2013). "Worried about tainted jerky treats? Here's how to keep your pets safe". Orange County Register. Archived from the original on April 17, 2014. Retrieved April 16, 2014. ^ "Animal Protection Institute (API)". Archived from the original on 2008-10-17. ^ "The Cornell Vet College". Archived from the original on 2007-04-09. Retrieved 2007-04-18. ^ "FDA Video Pet Food Safety". February 2014. Archived from the original on 2014-03-02. Retrieved 2014-04-16. ^ Imanishi M, Rotstein DS, Reimschuessel R, et al. (March 2014). "Outbreak of Salmonella enterica serotype Infantis infection in humans linked to dry dog food in the United States and Canada, 2012". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 244 (5): 545–53. doi:10.2460/javma.244.5.545. PMID 24548229. ^ "Diamond Pet Foods Agrees to Class Action Settlement". Archived from the original on 2014-04-06. Retrieved 2014-04-16. ^ Johnston, Andrea (February 1, 2013). "DVM". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 242 (3): 372–380. doi:10.2460/javma.242.3.372. PMID 23327181. ^ Helft, Miguel (12 December 2009). "Google Appears Closer to Releasing Its Own Phone". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 12 December 2009. On Saturday morning, Google confirmed that it was testing a new concept in mobile phones, writing in a blog post that it was 'dogfooding' the devices, an expression that comes from the idea that companies should "eat their own dog food", or use their own products. ^ "Microsoft tests its own 'dog food'". Tech News on ZDNet. Archived from the original on 21 June 2008. Retrieved 14 November 2009. ^ Dvorak, John C. (15 November 2007). "The Problem with Eating Your Own Dog Food". PC Magazine. Archived from the original on 28 June 2009. Retrieved 17 May 2010. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dog food. Interpreting pet food labels – Pet food labeling according to AAFCO regulations National Research Council (U.S.). Subcommittee on Dog Nutrition (1974). Nutrient requirements of dogs. National Academy of Sciences. ISBN 978-0-309-02315-3. vteDogsTypes African village dogs Feral dogs Pye-dogs Street dogs Hairless dogs Herding dogs Collies Livestock guardian dogs Sheepdogs Hunting dogs Curs Feists Lurchers Gun dogs Pointers Retrievers Setters Spaniels Water dogs Hounds Scenthounds Bassets Coonhounds Foxhounds Sighthounds Longdogs Terriers Bull-type terriers Pinschers Schnauzers Mastiffs Bulldogs Spitz Huskies Laikas Tugous Toy dogs Bichons Turnspit dogs Breeds List of breeds List of crossbreeds Mixed-breed dogs Crossbreeds Extinct breeds Most popular Roles Assistance dogs Autism dogs Guide dogs Hearing dogs Medical response dogs Seizure dogs Mobility assistance dogs Therapy dogs Psychiatric service dogs Attack dogs Bay dogs Carriage dogs Catch dogs Companion dogs Detection dogs Fighting dogs Guard dogs Lap dogs Meat dogs Mercy dogs Pet dogs Police dogs Search and rescue dogs Sled dogs War dogs Behavior Communication Barking Howling Human–canine bond Intelligence Dog–cat relationship Human–doginteraction Animal testing Baiting Breed-specific legislation Dog bite Dog fighting Dog park Dog show Human–canine bond Dog sports Dog walking Dog daycare Dog grooming Therapy Fear of dogs Dog licence Dog meat Dog food dog biscuit 2007 recalls Dogs in religion Dogs in space Origin of the domestic dog Health Aging (Longest living individual dogs) Anatomy Breeding Coat Conformation Diseases Dog food Odor Rabies in animals Rage syndrome Reproduction Skin disorders Vaccination Training Clicker Crate training Training Housebreaking Socialization Related List of individual dogs List of fictional dogs Category Portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dog_food&oldid=1177398225" Categories: Pet foodsDog nutritionHidden categories: CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertaintyWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: multiple names: authors listCS1 errors: periodical ignoredArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles with limited geographic scope from November 2022United States-centricWikipedia articles lacking focus from November 2020All Wikipedia articles lacking focusArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2018Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 September 2023, at 12:35 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement Toggle limited content width 

{article.name} Social Media Links facebook yelp instagram Search Skip Navigation Site Navigation Toggle navigation Home About About Events Locations Careers Services Blog Gallery Champion Pet Vet Savings Products Products Departments Contact Why Is My Dog Not Eating? Share this: Share on Facebook Pin on Pinterest Tweet on Twitter There can be many reasons why a dog’s appetite may change, but if your dog is not eating at all, a closer look at the animal’s diet and health may be necessary. By understanding why a dog may stop eating, you can be sure your canine companion is healthy and well-nourished with the proper diet for its needs. How a Dog’s Appetite Changes A dog’s appetite and eating habits will change throughout its life. Dogs eat differently based on their age, activity level, and overall health, and those changes are natural and no cause for concern. A hyperactive puppy, for example, will eat more to support its high energy level and ongoing growth, while a senior dog that doesn’t get frequent exercise will eat much less. Dogs eat more during pregnancy or while nursing, while mature dogs on a regular routine will generally have a more stable appetite. When a dog’s appetite changes abruptly or dramatically, however, it can be cause for concern. Why a Dog Might Stop Eating There are many reasons why a dog could stop eating, and a loss of appetite might be a symptom of different conditions. When your dog refuses to eat, consider… Mouth or Dental Injuries – If your dog has sore gums, has bitten its tongue, has a mouth wound, or may have dental problems such as loose or missing teeth, eating can be painful.Recent Vaccination – Appetite loss is a side effect of some vaccinations, but the dog’s appetite should return within a day or two.Medication – Similar to recent vaccinations, appetite loss can happen due to medications, especially if nausea may be a side effect of the treatment.New Surroundings – A nervous eater may lose its appetite if its feeding routine has changed, such as a new location due to a recent move or travel, new bowls, or other changes.Food Changes – Dogs develop taste preferences just as humans do, and a change in dog food formula or food composition can cause a picky eater to skip a meal.Bad Food – If a dog’s food has become stale or spoiled, some dogs will stop eating. Buying food in smaller bag sizes can ensure all the food is eaten before it becomes unpalatable.Stress – Just as stress affects a human’s appetite, it can affect a dog’s appetite. A change in living arrangements, family death, or shift in work schedule can all cause a dog to stop eating.Illness – Loss of appetite can be a symptom of many different illnesses and health conditions, such as cancer, kidney or liver problems, or poor intestinal health.Overfeeding – If a dog is getting too much to eat, it may stop eating occasionally just because it is overfull and not ready to eat again.Dirty Dishes – If the dog’s bowl is not washed thoroughly, residue from previous meals can taint the next meal and make it less appetizing. Similarly, the taste of soap residue can impact a meal.Manipulation – A dog that gets many treats might manipulate its owners at mealtime in the hopes of a tastier option, knowing that different food could be offered if it doesn’t eat. Encouraging Your Dog’s Appetite When your dog’s appetite changes, there are several ways to encourage better eating habits and more consistent mealtimes. Before making changes, however, consult with your veterinarian about possible health problems that may be the cause of the appetite loss, to be sure those conditions are properly diagnosed and treated if necessary. If there are no health problems affecting your dog’s appetite… Limit treats and snacks throughout the day so your dog is ready to eat at the proper mealtime.Increase the dog’s activity level and exercise for better overall health and a more consistent appetite.Establish a mealtime routine at the same time each day, using the same dishes and commands to help your dog understand it’s time to eat.Do not leave uneaten food out for the dog to nibble, but put away excess food after each mealtime has ended.Adjust the amount your dog gets at each meal to match its breed, weight, age, activity level, and nutritional needs to avoid overfeeding.Vary your dog’s diet somewhat to minimize picky eating and to help your dog adjust whenever the food composition may change.Add a splash of low sodium chicken or beef broth to dry food to make it more palatable and a bit softer for the dog to chew.Warm the dog’s food in the microwave briefly to make it more palatable and to encourage odors that will tempt the dog’s appetite.Take steps to minimize stress in the home so your dog feels more comfortable and at ease, which can improve the animal’s willingness to eat. Missing a meal or two is nothing to be concerned about, but if your dog does not return to its regular appetite, contact your veterinarian for assistance and recommendations. With care and attention to your dog’s nutritional needs, its appetite will return and mealtimes will become less stressful for you both. Comments Categories Click to View Blog Categories Horse Cattle Goats Swine Dogs Birds All in Birds Wild Birds & Squirrels Cats Small Animals Show Wildlife Poultry Seasonal & Home and Garden Pond Reptiles & Aquatics Large Animals All in Large Animals Foods Poultry Special Offers We are constantly adding new specials to our site. Be sure to check back often! View All Offers Company Events We currently do not have any events scheduled. View All Events Recent Blogs Does Your Dog Have a Flea Allergy? Fleas are a common annoyance to many dog owners, but these small pests can be a much bigger problem when a dog may be allergic to fleas. Recognizing if your... Finish reading Does Your Dog Have a Flea Allergy? Read All Blogs Skip Navigation Site Map Home About About Events Locations Careers Services Products Savings Blog Contact © 2023 Champion Feed & Pet Suppy. All rights reserved. Serving Delaware, OH View our accessibility statement Driven by New Media Retailer 

India TodayDailyONortheastMalayalamBusiness TodayBT BazaarWeb3CafeAaj TakLallantopBanglaGNTTViChowkReader’s DigestSports TakCrime TakAstro TakGamingHarper's BazaarBrides TodayCosmopolitanIshq FMAaj Tak CampusKisan TakIndia TodayDailyONortheastMalayalamBusiness TodayBT BazaarWeb3CafeAaj TakLallantopBanglaGNTTVLIVELive TVSearchSEARCHTRENDING TOPICSSIGN INDark ModeEdition ININUSHome TVLive TVProgrammes MagazineLatest EditionInsightIndiaWorldBusinessTechnologyEntertainmentShowbuzzBollywoodHollywoodOTTTelevisionKorean WaveLatest ReviewsLifestyleSportsVideosAllNewsMoFact Check Other NewsElectionsScienceEducationHealthIt's ViralLaw TodayAutoEnvironmentCitiesHoroscopesWeather SpecialsPodcastsSunday SpecialDIUInteractivesOpinionFollow Us On: NewsLifestyleHealthAre your food habits impacting your dog?Are your food habits impacting your dog?Feeding our dogs based on our own dietary preferences is leading to an increase in the incidence of lifestyle diseases such as diabetes in canines.Listen to StoryLive TVShareAdvertisementHarsha ChawlaUPDATED: Jun 15, 2010 17:20 ISTBet you didn't imagine that your dog's blood sugar was nearly as high as your own. Or that he would need insulin shots and a special diet to get it back into the normal range. India is clearly becoming the diabetes nation of the world for all its inhabitants, including its dogs. Vets say this has much to do with the lifestyle of their owners: small living spaces that don't allow movement, and overfeeding of the wrong kind of food. This is a worrying trend, especially since more and more urban Indians are acquiring dogs.According to Nagesh Mehrotra of Wisdom Pet Kindom, the popularity of pets has risen significantly. Today he sells 6 dogs a day, almost double the figure of 3-4 a decade ago. The social status of dogs certainly seems to have shot up along with that of their owner, and they enjoy the kind of lifestyle a common man in India could only just dream of."In cities, it's not just the people who have poor eating habits. Pets too fall under this influence as they are treated as family members. Dogs eat the way their owners eat, which is the prime reason they are unhealthy and obese," says Delhi- based veterinary expert Dr Pradeep Rana. But, is it fair or reasonable to impose our dietary and lifestyle choices on our pets? We find the answers by talking to veterinary experts and those with a passionate fondness for dogs.Different from humansDogs may be man's best friend but raising them as if they belong to the human species can be unhealthy and cut short their life span. According to a study done on the diets of 600 dead dogs by a Belgian acupuncturist, allergies and obesity reduce the life expectancy of dogs, which are an outcome of unhealthy diets such as junk food. Also, just like their humans, obesity in dogs can lead to the same afflictions such as diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, and joint pain. Another important readon't son why such diseases are on rise is overindulgence.Owners often confuse love with food and give their dogs too much food and too many snacks in proportion to the exercise they get. "Owners share a few morsels with their pets every time they eat thinking even the pet feels hunger the way humans do. So, sometimes it's not the lack of knowledge of the owner but their guilt which makes them overfeed their pets," says Dr Vipin Sharma. According to experts, dogs don't require more than two meals a day. And, too much snacking in between the meals is not just bad for their health but also spoils them.Though variety is a good thing, owners should avoid changing their dog's food on a daily basis. This is because their digestive tracts are much shorter and their systems can't handle too much change at one time. " Owners often readon't realise that the picky habits of their pets are an outcome of their extravagance. Changing your dogs' food on a regular basis is bad for their health as it upsets their stomach and also makes them indisciplined," says Dr Sharma.Understand your petThere is no diet fit for all kinds of dogs. Diets have to be customised depending on the size, weight, breed and age of the dog. "There is no ideal diet for dogs. Diets have to be designed according to the size and breed of a dog. For instance, when I had a Great Dane I would feed him meat. But I give a pure vegetarian diet to my Puggle, which is a toy dog. Essentially, every pet owner has to figure out a suitable diet for his pet as every dog is allergic to some food. My Puggle refuses to have milk so I feed him curd," says forty- year- old Anjali Gupta.Just like a child's needs differ from an adult, the nutritional requirements of puppies are different from those of dogs: they require about 30- 32 percent of protein whereas adults dogs require 22 percent of protein in their diet. This is because puppies grow faster. Similarly, the breeds which grow faster require more food than a slow growing breed. Where a German Shepherd and Pug are concerned, for example, the former would definitely require much more food than a Pug whose growing process is very slow. So, feeding a Pug large meals would not make it healthy but obese and lazy.There are also a few breeds which require just one meal a day. Also, according to vets the level of activity is an important factor in designing the right diet for your dog. If a dog doesn't have a fixed exercise routine, this means he will burn fewer calories. In such a case, the amount of fats should be reduced from the diet.Packaged or home-madeWith lot of fancy dog food in the market--holistic, kosher, high-fibre, gluten-free, high protein-many pet owners often think commercial dog food is far superior to homecooked food, which is not always true. Packaged dog food originated in countries where people didn't have time to cook for themselves, so cooking for pets was unimaginable for owners. It's the convenience factor which drives the dog food market. However, there are a growing number of people in western countries who are switching over to home cooked meals for their dogs after reports of tainted pet food, which explains why the sales of cookbooks for dogs and cats are booming.Controversies over pet food are also making news as experts say that they are not covered by the same labelling requirements as food for humans. For instance, according to a report in The Guardian, "EC permitted" additives covers a multitude of sins, including 4,000 chemicals and artificial colours banned for human consumption. "Meat and animal derivatives" can cover anything scraped off the slaughterhouse floor, while "derivatives of vegetable origin" is so broad as to include charcoal.However, according to doctors in the city, packaged food is often a good choice for people with busy lives. They believe this is better for pets than being fed milk and bread on a daily basis, which leads to nutritional deficiencies. However, doctors strictly recommend that dog owners educate themselves on the multiple varieties of commercial dog food.Dr Sharma recounts one of his clients who was disturbed about the increasing weight of his Pug. After a few consultations, the owner revealed to Dr Sharma that he was giving his Pug the same packaged food he was giving to his Saint Bernard, a large dog who weighs around 60 kg. " Packaged dog food should be bought after reading the labels carefully as they are divided into breeds or sizes," says Dr Sharma.According to Dr Sharma, home- cooked food does have certain advantages over packaged food. It's fresh and the owner can customise it based on his pet's taste. But here too, caution and discernment is called for. For instance, sharing your piping hot Chinese meal with its high levels for salt, garlic and onion can be toxic for dogs."When you tell people that you feed your dog home-cooked food they often think you don't want to spend on expensive packaged dog food. For many people home-cooked food means khichdi or daal chawal. Whereas making home- cooked meals requires extra efforts as you have to cook it separately," says Mrs Gupta. Dietary changes may be called forDogs, like human beings, need a change in their diet as they age, fall sick or when the season changes. Those with certain health conditions need a prescription diet that has different amounts of fat, protein and carbs. A dog with kidney problems, for example, can't be kept on a regular protein diet. In fact, a low protein diet is often advocated when a dog has any health problem related with a weak kidney-kidney failure, kidney disease, UTI or kidney stones.The purpose of limiting protein intake is to reduce the workload of the kidneys, which are responsible for removing toxins and waste from the body.Similarly, a dog's diet should be altered when the season changes. "As the temperature rises, dogs start eating less and their activity levels also go down. So, they shouldn't be fed a high- protein diet and instead should be given more fluids, carbohydrates, fruit and curd," says Dr R T Sharma. It's important to know what kind of food is best for your dog and what he is allergic to, and create a diet plan based on this information.Pets' day outGuess people aren't the only ones who need a break from sweltering heat. These days dogs too enjoy this luxury. Dogs' resorts offer everything a human would crave for while holidaying: large and serene green spaces, swimming pool, parlour, good food and friends. Gurgaon based Kennel1 offers a boarding facility for dogs when their owners are travelling or need a break. However, unlike resorts for people, accommodation is provided only after a meeting with the owner and pet to ensure that the latter is vaccinated, social and diseasefree . " Our priority is to give our canine guests an excellent service. So, we don't take more than 20 dogs at a time to avoid overcrowding," says Ashu Reuben, who opened Kennel1 five years ago. Kennel 1 also has trainers and a vet-on-call. Boarding charges for a day begin at Rs 275.Dog bytesDon't spoil your pet by feeding him with your hands. Inculcating such habits later creates trouble for owners when pets refuse to eat on their own.Dogs should be kept away from certain food items such as onion, garlic, chocolate, dry fruit, curry, salt and spices. Also, they should not be fed raw meat or egg.Don't feed leftovers to your pets as small portions add up to a big amount by the end of the day, leading to more calories.Food just a call awayMutton biryani, arabian goulash and aloo paneer sabzi are just a few of the lip- smacking items on the menu of a home-food delivery service for dogs. It's not just big food brands like Nestl, and Procter & Gamble that are cashing in on the extravagance of pet owners who want to give their dogs the best and don't mind spending on the fancy packaged foods made by these companies. A few enterprising people in India, too, are making a living out of dog food. Twenty-eight-year-old Abhishek Kapoor of Scooby Corporations started a daily delivery service of home-cooked dog food in 2007.With a customer base of 250 clients, Kapoor is optimistic about the growth of the business. "The food I deliver works out much cheaper than the branded commercial food. Moreover, I provide a good variety of fresh food which can be changed based on the dog's needs. We even cater to pets with health problems, " he says. Priced between Rs 1000 to Rs. 10, 000 per month depending on the menu, the premium service includes broccoli and celery and delivers meals twice a day at your doorstep. Such a service is also available in Mumbai and Bhopal.Veg or non-veg?Dogs suffer from nutritional deficiencies just like people do if they aren't fed properly.While there is no dispute about the need for a balanced diet, the issue of whether this should be vegetarian or not is a fuzzy one. Dog lover Anuradha Kakar is among the many who swear by a non- vegetarian diet for their dogs. "I feed my dogs a non- vegetarian diet since their bodies require it. Canines are carnivorous and need a highprotein diet to be healthy and active. Tofu and roti can't provide what a dog needs," she says. Clearly she is not alone. Owners of dog food services in Delhi and Mumbai say that over 90 percent of their customers order non- vegetarian food for their pets. They say that even though a chunk of customers are vegetarian themselves, they still order non- veg meals for their dogs. Mumbai-based Homecare Dogfood service owner Wasiff Khan is a proponent of non- veggie meals and often advises his vegetarian customers about the importance of non-veg diet for a dog. "Canines require a high protein diet which they can get only through non-vegetarian food," says Khan.On the other hand, there are many households in India that maintain their dogs on a vegetarian diet. Nirupama Sarma, who has had dogs in her home ever since since she was a child says, " Being a vegetarian family, we always fed our dogs vegetarian food, which doesn't mean dal and roti but a balanced veggie diet which includes porridge, millet and soya milk. All our dogs have been healthy, without a day of infection or allergy." A few doctors in the city agree with Sarma. According to Dr Sharma, dogs fed a vegetarian diet can be as healthy as those fed non- vegetarian food." Dogs' digestive systems are suited for some plant foods as well as flesh. So, go for a balanced veggie diet if you don't want to add portions of non- veg. If you feed your dog porridge, green vegetables, soya nuggets and other sources of starch, he will definitely stay fit,' says Dr Sharma.Just like pet owners, veterinary experts are also divided in their opinion. " Dogs need a high- protein diet and certain essential vitamins which are not found in vegetarian food such as Methionine, Arginine and Vitamin H," says Dr Pradeep Rana. Most experts agree that a mixture of veg and non- veg food provides the ideal nutrition. "An all-meat diet for a dog living in a tropical country like India can be unhealthy which is why a healthy mix is the best," says Dr Rana.advertisementEdited By: AtMigration Published On: Jun 15, 2010--- ENDS --- Listen to this storyWatch Live TV AdvertisementAlso Watch2:47Over 50 killed, several injured in 2 suicide blasts in Pakistan10:20Watch: Vishal reacts to censor board-corruption row, says 'wanted the truth out'9:19Sonam Kapoor on her 3-year hiatus, bonding with Vayu, Rhea Kapoor | Exclusive 7:06ISKCON sends Rs 100 crore defamation notice to Maneka Gandhi0:23Caught on camera: Bus carrying 25 passengers falls into river in Madhya PradeshAdvertisementRead ThisCulprits of Manipur students' killing arrested from Churachandpur: N Biren SinghGovernment employees protest in Delhi demanding restoration of Old Pension SchemeAthletics: Tajinderpal Singh Toor wins Gold in Shotput with 20.36m throw26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed’s aide shot dead in Karachi: ReportPM Modi launches projects worth Rs 13,500 crore in poll-bound TelanganaAdvertisement Follow Us On: Advertisement PUBLICATIONS India Today Business Today India Today-Hindi TIME TELEVISION India Today TV Aaj Tak Good News Today EVENTS Agenda AajTak India Today Conclave Sahitya AajTak RADIO Ishq FM AajTak Radio GAMING India Today Gaming World Esports Cup USEFUL LINKS Press Release Sitemap News Newsletter Privacy Policy Correction Policy LMIL Documents PRINTING Thomson Press WELFARE Care Today DISTRIBUTION Rate Card SYNDICATIONS Headlines Today WEBSITES India Today India Today Malayalam India Today NE Business Today DailyO AajTak Lallantop Bangla GNTTV iChowk Reader’s Digest Cosmopolitan EDUCATION Vasant Valley Best Colleges Best Universities Download App ABOUT US CONTACT US TERMS AND CONDITIONS ARCHIVES Copyright © 2023 Living Media India Limited. For reprint rights: Syndications Today 

Skip to main content The Ohio State University Help BuckeyeLink Map Find People Webmail Search Ohio State Indoor Pet Initiative Search form Search HomeAbout UsNewsEventsCalendarPast EventsPeopleFor VeterinariansLow-stress diet and feeding changes for catsMicrochip Fact SheetReferring a Behavior CaseImplementing Low-Stress Handling in Your PracticeBasic ConceptsTroubleshootingCanine Handling ToolsEnvironmental Enrichment Resources and ReferencesContinuing Education OpportunitiesFor Pet OwnersCatsBasic Indoor Cat NeedsA Purrfect StartInformed OwnersLitter BoxesScratchingResting AreasPerchesToysIdentifying Prey PreferenceMaking ChangesRefugeWhat is Feliway?FACT (Free Access Crate Training)Understanding CatsSleeping HabitsHiding InstinctSocial HabitsEating HabitsTerritoryGrooming and TemperatureCats PredatorsFeline Life StressorsBringing Cats IndoorsComings and GoingsEvents In and Around the HouseNew EnvironmentsNew PetsThe VeterinarianTraveling with Your CatProblem SolvingHow to Clean-Up Cat UrineSpraying and MarkingSeparation AnxietyConflict Between CatsIncreasing the ActivityPet IdentificationMicrochip Fact SheetOther ResourcesDogsPuppy Prep SchoolSocializationCrate TrainingHousetrainingGetting to Know My VeterinarianBasic MannersManaging Mouthy BehaviorsPuppy ClassesWarning Signs that Your Pup has a Behavior ProblemBasic NeedsEnvironmental EnrichmentProblem BehaviorsTraining MethodsNew AdditionsIntroducing Your Dog to Your New BabyIntroducing a New Dog to Your Current DogIntroducing Dogs and CatsChanges in Aging PetsSensory Decline in Aging PetsMusculoskeletal Changes in Older DogsCognitive Dysfunction Syndrome (CDS)Cats (Spanish)Que Necesitan los Gatos de InteriorUn Comienzo PurrfectoPropietarios InformadosCajas de Arena o LiteraRasguñar / ArañarÁrea de descansoRepisas o perchasJuguetesIdentifique la preferencia de juguete (presa) de su gatoComo Realizar CambiosQue es un area de Refugio?Que es Feliway?Entrenamiento con JaulaEl Inigualable FelinoHábitos de Sueño de los GatosInstinto de Huir o EsconderseHábitos SocialesHábitos AlimenticiosTerritorioLimpieza y TemperaturaPredadoresSituaciones estresantesExterior-InteriorBienvenidas y DespedidasEventosNuevos AmbientesNueva MascotaEl VeterinarioViajesSolución de problemasComo Limpiar Orina De GatoMarcaje UrinarioAnsiedad por separaciónConflicto Entre GatosIncremente la Actividad de su GatoManteniendo Sanos los Gatos de InteriorIdentificación de MascotasOtros EnlacesResourcesGivingMake an Appointment Eating Habits You are hereHome » For Pet Owners » Cats » Understanding Cats Cats are carnivores; they primarily eat small rodents, birds, and bugs. Because hunting is such a big part of a cat's life, even indoor cats want to engage in hunting types of activity. Keep this in mind when shopping for toys for your cat; most prefer those that resemble mice, birds, and bugs (identify your cat's "prey preference"). If you really want to make it realistic, make the toy move like it really is alive! (See more information about toys). CatsBasic Indoor Cat Needs Understanding CatsSleeping Habits Hiding Instinct Social Habits Eating Habits Territory Grooming and Temperature Cats Predators Feline Life Stressors Problem Solving Pet Identification Other Resources Dogs Cats (Spanish) College of Food Agriculture and Environmental Sciences © The Ohio State University The Indoor Pet Initiative 601 Vernon Tharp Street Columbus, OH 43210Contact Us If you have a disability and experience difficulty accessing this content, contact CVM-DigitalAccessibility@osu.edu Give Now Login College of Veterinary Medicine Veterinary Medical Center Ohio State University 

Close Search About Us Everyday Care Main Menu CareClub Know Your Pet Breed Information Press Center Main Menu Press Center Events Careers Shop Explore Shop Main Menu Explore Shop All Products All Products Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Dogs For Dogs Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Cats For Cats Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets Find Care Welcome to Existing Account Already have a myVCA account? Log in 24/7 to access your pet’s health care information. Log In Now Activate Your Account Looking for a convenient way to access your pet’s health records, refill prescriptions, view upcoming appointments and more? Set up your myVCA account today. Activate Account Find Care myVCA Search Shopping Cart × Search Home Know Your Pet Feeding Times And Frequency For Cats Feeding Times and Frequency for Your Cat By Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Robin Downing, DVM, DAAPM, DACVSMR, CVPP, CRPP Print Article I've heard conflicting advice about feeding my cat - once a day, twice a day, just keep the bowl filled. What is a good feeding schedule for cats?Feeding your cat does not have to be mysterious. By recognizing a few key concepts and attributes of cats we can create a very reasonable feeding plan for them. Cats are creatures of habit. We can use this fact to our advantage by creating a regular feeding schedule and sticking to it. Feeding an adult cat at regular times provides the security and predictability of a routine. Meals become a cornerstone event of the day around which other activities are added. A feeding routine helps your cat cope when there are changes in the household (e.g., a child moves away to college, a new baby arrives, or a vacation during which a house-sitter is in charge). "A feeding routine helps a cat cope when there are changes in the household." A feeding routine makes a necessary food change easier. When your cat is used to eating at the same times each day, her body becomes conditioned to expect food at those times. Hunger can be a great motivator! If the stage is set for increased hunger followed by meals at regular times, then transitioning to a new food will often be seamless and straightforward. Cats have a simple stomach anatomy - just like humans. Because cats have a simple stomach structure, once the stomach is filled with food, it will empty within a few hours as food moves into the small intestine. After 8 - 10 hours, an empty stomach begins to send signals to the brain stimulating a hunger response. For this reason, at least two meals per day are best for your cat. Imagine if you only got to eat breakfast each day, and that was it! Regular, routine feeding times allow your cat's body to be prepared for the food it will receive. It is not recommended to keep the bowl filled and allow grazing. A break in eating habits can be a warning sign of illness. When cats eat on a regular schedule, that habit becomes strong. It is easy to see at a glance if all the food from a meal is consumed. If food is left, whether all or part of a meal, it is an important signal that something is wrong, and it is time to schedule a veterinary appointment. I was told that kittens should eat all they want; 3 or 4 times per day. Is this true?Feeding a kitten all it can eat at one time is called ‘ad libitum’ or ‘free choice’ feeding. This is not recommended as it can create juvenile obesity, encourage binge eating, as well as setting the stage for some orthopedic problems and diabetes. Over-eating at any one meal can also cause stomach discomfort and bloating causing slower digestion. Cats are acknowledged to have a genetically determined "set point" for their adult size. Slower, controlled growth in kittens optimizes body condition in adulthood. How many meals should my cat eat each day?The number of meals a cat eats per day depends completely on the family schedule. Cats should eat at least two meals each day, about 12 hours apart. But a breakfast, lunch, afternoon, dinner, and right before bed schedule is an equally great option. If more than 12 hours elapses between meals, the stomach can become hyperacidic causing nausea. My cat doesn’t finish her meal all at once. I think she prefers to graze. What should I do?Some cats really can regulate their food intake fairly well. It is still a good idea to create the expectation of mealtimes. This will help make it easier if another pet is added to your family at some point in the future. For grazers, simply measure out the entire day's portion of food in the morning and offer the bowl several times throughout the day. Choose regular times in order to create the routine we know is helpful. The important thing is to use a measured portion, either with a measuring cup or a kitchen scale, for the day. "The important thing is to use a measured portion for the day." Another consideration is the use of food toys. Many options exist from rolling food toys that just drop out a kibble of food intermittently to stationary food toys that require the cat to work for the food. See the handout “Feeding the Mind and Body: Interactive Feeders for Dogs and Cats” for more information on these types of feeders. Food toys are almost as entertaining for the people in your family as they are for your cat! Your veterinarian remains the best source of nutritional guidance for your cat, answering important questions such as the type of food to feed, how much to feed, and how frequently to feed. Feeding time can be an important bonding time. Creating routine and regular feeding times builds fun into everyday activities. Contributors: Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Robin Downing, DVM, DAAPM, DACVSMR, CVPP, CRPP Keywords Care & Wellness Nutrition Pet Services Find a Hospital Locate a hospital near you Learn more Related Articles VCA ANIMAL HOSPITALS About Us Contact Us Find a Hospital Location Directory Press Center Social Responsibility Career Opportunities Grow Your Hospital Sitemap Affiliate of Mars Inc. 2023 | © Copyright VCA Animal Hospitals all rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Web Accessibility | AdChoices | Cookie Notice | Cookie Settings | Your Privacy Choices 

