Skip to main content Search n i direct Main navigation Home News Contacts Help Twitter Facebook YouTube RSS Welfare of cats: normal behaviour patterns The way a cat behaves is individual and depends on its age, breed or type and past experience. Most cats are playful, sociable animals and they enjoy playing together with toys, people and other cats. Changes in behaviour may suggest that something is wrong with a cat's health. What your cat needsHow a cat behaves depends on its age, personality and past experiences.Most cats are playful animals and enjoy socialising with people. Cats like to play with toys and those that do not go outside often play at hunting indoors. Some cats, especially those that live outdoors, may be less sociable with people and other animals.Cats sleep for many hours each day. When they are awake they need opportunities to exercise and play. Additionally, all cats need a suitable scratching place, high enough to allow them to stretch out fully, to mark their territory and condition their claws.Any change in behaviour may suggest that your cat is distressed and needs help.Scratching or 'claw conditioning' is part of normal cat behaviour. Cats condition their claws for various reasons, and regular scratching removes the frayed and worn outer claws, exposing the new and sharper claws growing underneath. It also exercises and strengthens the muscles used when the claws move in and out of the paw, which is essential for a cat's normal behaviour of climbing and catching prey.What your cat needs to behave normallyYou should:make sure your cat receives enough mental, social and physical stimulation to satisfy its individual behavioural needsprovide your cat with safe toys and regular opportunities to play with friendly people and by itselfmake sure that your cat can rest undisturbed when it wants tomake sure your cat has opportunities to exercise each day to stay fit, happy and healthyprovide suitable indoor activities to keep your cat active, if it does not go outsidetake advice from a vet or other suitably qualified cat care specialist. if you are unsure how much exercise your cat needsmake sure that your cat can reach all the things that it needs (for example bed, food, water, litter or outdoors) without having to get too close to things, people or other animals that may scare itknow how your cat behaves when fit, happy and healthyseek advice from a vet or other suitably qualified cat care specialist if its behaviour changes or becomes a problem it could be distressed, bored, ill or injurednever shout at, or punish, your cat - it will not understand and will just become more nervous or scaredonly use positive reward-based training, and avoid harsh, potentially painful, training methodsmake sure children allow cats to exhibit normal behaviours More useful links Cats Search for a veterinary practice Animal welfare and pets Share this page Share on Facebook (external link opens in a new window / tab) Share on Twitter (external link opens in a new window / tab) Share by email (external link opens in a new window / tab) Cats Welfare of cats: an introductionWelfare of cats: getting on with other animalsWelfare of cats: normal behaviour patternsWelfare of cats: protection from pain and diseaseWelfare of cats: the need for a suitable dietWelfare of cats: the need for a suitable environment Translation help How to translate this page Help improve this page - send your feedback You must have JavaScript enabled to use this form. What do you want to do? report a problem leave feedback ask a question Report a problem Which problem did you find on this page? (Tick all that apply) A link, button or video is not working There is a spelling mistake Information is missing, outdated or wrong I can't find what I'm looking for Another issue Messages You will not receive a reply. We will consider your feedback to help improve the site. Don't include any personal or financial information, for example National Insurance, credit card numbers, or phone numbers. Tell us more about the problem you're having with the nidirect website. Enter your feedback What is your question about? Choose a topic for your question: - Select -AnglingBenefitsBirth certificatesBlue BadgeCareersCompensation due to a road problemChild MaintenanceCivil partnership certificatesCoronavirus (COVID-19)COVID vaccination certificateCriminal record checks (AccessNI)Death certificatesEducational Maintenance AllowanceEmployment rightsHigh Street Spend Local SchemeMarriage certificatesMotoringnidirect accountPassportsPenalty Charge NoticesPensionsPRONI - historical recordsRates or property valuationProblems with roads and streetsSmartpassMy question is about something else What to do next Comments or queries about angling can be emailed to anglingcorrespondence@daera-ni.gov.uk If you have a comment or query about benefits, you will need to contact the government department or agency which handles that benefit. Contacts for common benefits are listed below. Carer's Allowance Call 0800 587 0912 Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk Discretionary support / Short-term benefit advance Call 0800 587 2750 Email customerservice.unit@communities-ni.gov.uk Disability Living Allowance Call 0800 587 0912 Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk Employment and Support Allowance Call 0800 587 1377 Jobseeker’s Allowance Contact your local Jobs & Benefits office Personal Independence Payment Call 0800 587 0932 If your query is about another benefit, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. Comments or queries about the Blue Badge scheme can be emailed to bluebadges@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk or you can also call 0300 200 7818. For queries or advice about careers, contact the Careers Service. For queries or advice about Child Maintenance, contact the Child Maintenance Service. For queries or advice about claiming compensation due to a road problem, contact DFI Roads claim unit. If you can’t find the information you’re looking for in the Coronavirus (COVID-19) section, then for queries about: Restrictions or regulations — contact the Department of Health Travel advice (including self-isolation) — contact the Department of Health Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccinations — contact the Department of Health or Public Health Agency If your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk and for queries about your certificate, email covidcertni@hscni.net. For queries or advice about criminal record checks, email ani@accessni.gov.uk Application and payment queries can be emailed to ema_ni@slc.co.uk For queries or advice about employment rights, contact the Labour Relations Agency. For queries or advice about birth, death, marriage and civil partnership certificates and research, contact the General Register Office Northern Ireland (GRONI) by email gro_nisra@finance-ni.gov.uk For queries about the High Street Spend Local Scheme, email HSSS.mail@economy-ni.gov.uk. For queries about:Car tax, vehicle registration and SORNcontact the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA), Swansea Driver licensing and tests, MOT and vehicle testingcontact the Driver & Vehicle Agency (DVA), Northern IrelandIf your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk. For queries or advice about passports, contact HM Passport Office. For queries or advice about Penalty Charge Notices (PCNs), including parking tickets and bus lane PCNs, email dcu@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk For queries or advice about pensions, contact the Northern Ireland Pension Centre. If you wish to report a problem with a road or street you can do so online in this section.If you wish to check on a problem or fault you have already reported, contact DfI Roads. For queries or advice about historical, social or cultural records relating to Northern Ireland, use the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI) enquiry service. For queries or advice about rates, email LPSCustomerTeam@lpsni.gov.uk For queries or advice about 60+ and Senior Citizen SmartPasses (which can be used to get concessionary travel on public transport), contact Smartpass - Translink. If you have a question about a government service or policy, you should contact the relevant government organisation directly. We don't have access to information about you. Extra comments (optional) Related sites gov.uk nibusinessinfo.co.uk Links to supporting information Accessibility statement Crown copyright Terms and conditions Privacy Cookies Twitter Facebook YouTube RSS 

Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search Login Subscribe Subscribe Home Quizzes & Games History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Companions Demystified Image Galleries Infographics Lists Podcasts Spotlights Summaries The Forum Top Questions #WTFact 100 Women Britannica Kids Saving Earth Space Next 50 Student Center Home Quizzes & Games History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos cat Table of Contents cat Table of Contents Introduction & Top QuestionsOrigin and history of catsDomesticationAssociations with human cultureGeneral features and special adaptationsCoordination and musculatureTeethClawsSensesBehaviourSpecial traitsBehavioral problemsOther traitsCats as petsNutritionReproductionDiseases and parasitesGeneticsColourOther charactersBreedsList of selected shorthair breedsList of selected longhair breeds References & Edit History Related Topics Images & Videos For Students domestic cat summary Quizzes Animal Factoids Know Your Mammals Quiz Weird Animals Quiz All About Pets Quiz Ultimate Animals Quiz Related Questions What is the lineage of cats? When do dogs need shots? What is a dog? Why do dogs bark? Why do dogs sniff other dogs’ rear ends? Read Next Abundant Animals: The Most Numerous Organisms in the World Do Cats Cause Schizophrenia? Vikings Helped Cats Conquer the World 6 Domestic Animals and Their Wild Ancestors Working Like a Dog: 7 Animals with Jobs Discover Ten Days That Vanished: The Switch to the Gregorian Calendar 5 Unbelievable Facts About Christopher Columbus The Death of Shakespeare 12 Novels Considered the “Greatest Book Ever Written” A Brief (and Fascinating) History of Money Titanosaurs: 8 of the World's Biggest Dinosaurs 9 of the World’s Deadliest Snakes Home Science Mammals Cats & the Feline Family Behaviour Special traits groomingThe cat has a subtle repertoire of facial expressions, vocal sounds, and tail and body postures that express its emotional state and intentions. These various signals serve to increase, decrease, or maintain social distance. One distinctive social behaviour involves rubbing the side of the head, lips, chin, or tail against the owner and against furniture. These regions of the cat’s body contain scent glands that seem to play a role in establishing a familiar odour in the cat’s environment. The tongue of all cats, which has a patch of sharp, backward-directed spines called filiform papillae near the tip, has the appearance and feel of a coarse file; the spines help the cat to groom itself. The disposition to cleanliness is well established in cats, and they groom themselves at length, especially after meals. Learn why only domestic cats purr and not other felinesSee all videos for this articleWhile lions and other big cats roar, domestic cats and other Felis species purr. Purring has been described as a low, continuous, rattling hum and often is interpreted as an expression of pleasure or contentment. Purring also occurs in cats that are injured and in pain, however, so that this vocalization can be seen as the cat’s “mantra”—that is, as a relaxing, self-comforting sound and a friendly mood-conveying signal. Behavioral problems Under conditions of domestication, the cat is subject to a variety of factors that result in behaviour indicative of emotional distress and difficulty in adapting to the home environment. Some behaviours are not abnormal but are difficult for owners to accept. Britannica Quiz Ultimate Animals Quiz The most common behaviour problem in companion cats is that they sometimes urinate and defecate outside the litter box in the house. Organic causes include feline urologic syndrome (urinary bladder inflammation and calculi, or stones, in the urinary tract), blocked or impacted anal glands, and constipation. Emotional causes include the addition of a new family member—another cat, a child, or a spouse. Such changes may make the cat feel insecure, so that it deposits urine and feces around the house, possibly as territorial marks for security. Cats are creatures of habit, and any change in the family structure or in daily routines—resulting, for example, from a move or even from rearranging furniture—can be stressful. Another common behaviour problem in cats is their natural desire to rake objects such as drapes and furniture with their claws. Surgical removal of the front claws to prevent property damage is normally repugnant to cat lovers. Cats can be trained to use carpeted scratching posts in the house to satisfy this behavioral need, which may be a combination of claw cleaning and sharpening and of territorial marking. Many cats engage in social licking and in the grooming of their feline and human companions, which is a natural display of affection and dependence. Some also engage in nursing behaviour, sucking on people’s fingers and earlobes, on their own paws and tails, and on blankets and woolen clothing. Nursing may be a cat’s way of regressing and relaxing into kittenish behaviour. It is often more intense in cats weaned too early or in those malnourished in kittenhood. For various emotional reasons some cats may groom themselves to the point of self-mutilation or become compulsive wool suckers and eaters. Pica—a hunger for nonnutritive substances—may be a symptom of the need for more roughage in the diet or of feline leukemia or other health problems. As with the dog, excessive eating and drinking is frequently associated with endocrine diseases such as diabetes and thyroid dysfunction. Cats often vomit soon after eating, which is most often caused by the accumulation of fur balls in the stomach, although a food allergy, feline leukemia, or other organic cause may be involved. Active and healthy cats often race through the house as though they were crazed. These “evening crazies” (which can also erupt early in the morning) result from the cat’s ancient rhythm of actively hunting around dawn and dusk. In the domestic environment, this normal, instinctive behaviour often still occurs, to the consternation of some owners who fear that their cat may have rabies, a brain tumour, or an unstable personality. Changes in animals’ behaviour should not, therefore, be dismissed as psychological (or as simple disobedience, as when a cat suddenly becomes unhousebroken, for example), since there may be an underlying physical cause. Nevertheless, abnormal behaviour in animals often does have a nonphysical, psychological, or emotional origin, which should always be considered in the diagnosis and treatment of the ailments of companion animals. Other traits The cat’s sleep patterns are different from those of dogs and humans. Dogs and humans have long periods of REM (rapid eye movement) sleep, the stage that is associated with dreaming. In contrast, the cat rarely lapses into REM sleep. Instead, it has a lighter, episodic sleep pattern that enables it to rest but to be instantly alert. When sick, cats have a tendency to withdraw and become inactive, which helps them conserve energy. A sick cat may seem lifeless but recover after a few days of withdrawal, which is one reason cats are said to have nine lives. (A sick cat should always be taken to a veterinarian, however; it is negligent simply to let nature take its course.) Cats are known to have traveled hundreds of miles to find their owners in new homes to which they themselves have never been. Dogs have also performed such feats of so-called psi (psychic) trailing. Scientists have not been able to find a physiological or psychological explanation for this ability. 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Communication Toggle Communication subsection 1.1Body language 1.1.1The tail 1.1.2The eyes 1.2Scent rubbing and spraying 1.3Body postures 2Grooming 3Kneading 4Panting 5Reflexes Toggle Reflexes subsection 5.1Righting reflex 5.2Freeze reflex 6Eating patterns 7Sleeping patterns 8Excretion 9Socialization Toggle Socialization subsection 9.1Colony organization 9.2Social learning 9.3Socialization between cats 9.3.1Social conflicts 9.4Socialization with humans 10Predatory behavior 11Environment 12See also 13References Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Cat behavior 3 languages ČeštinaEspañol한국어 Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Behavior of cats This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Cat behavior" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Cat behavior is a cat's behavior and responses to events and other stimuli. Cat behavior includes body language, elimination habits, aggression, play, communication, hunting, grooming, urine marking, and face rubbing. It varies among individuals, colonies, and breeds. Communication and sociability can vary greatly among individual cats. In a family with many cats, the interactions can change depending on which individuals are present and how restricted the territory and resources are. One or more individuals may become aggressive: fighting may occur with the attack, resulting in scratches and deep bite wounds. Communication[edit] Main article: Cat communication A staring cat Kittens vocalize early in development. Some examples of different vocalizations are described below.[1] Purring - means that the cat is either content or is self-soothing due to fear Meowing - a frequently used greeting. A mother meows when interacting with her young. Meows can also be used when a cat wishes for attention. [2] Hissing or spitting - indicates an angry or defensive cat. Yowling - means that the cat is in distress or feeling aggressive. Chattering - occurs when hunting or tracking potential prey. This consists of quick chirps made while the mouth vibrates. The gaze is fixed and staring. This behavior may be in response to a surge of adrenaline or may be caused by the anticipation of a pending hunt.[3] Body language[edit] Cats greeting by rubbing against each other; the upright "question mark shape" tails indicate happiness or friendship Cats rely strongly on body language to communicate. A cat may rub against an object or lick a person. Much of a cat's body language is through its tail, ears, head position, and back posture. The tail[edit] Observing how a cat holds its tail can give a good sense of the cat’s current temperament. Held high, may have a slight curl forward - a sign of friendliness. The cat is happy, content, and comfortable. The tail may quiver or vibrate if the cat is excited. Held low and tucked under - a sign of fear or unease. The cat is attempting to make itself a smaller target to potential threats. Flicking, twitching - a sign of agitation. The cat is on high alert or is upset, and is not receptive to interaction. Cats may also flick their tails in an oscillating, snake-like motion, or abruptly from side to side, often just before pouncing on an object or animal. [4] The eyes[edit] When cats greet another cat in their vicinity, they can do a slow, languid, long blink to communicate affection if they trust the person or animal they are in contact with. One way to communicate love and trust to a cat is to say its name, get its attention, look it in the eyes and then slowly blink at it to emulate trust and love. They may return the gesture.[5] In a study of 18 cats, the cat behavior of several half-blinks followed by a prolonged eye narrowing or eye closure was found to be a positive emotional response. When a familiar human slow-blinks towards a cat, the cat tends to approach the human more frequently than if the human has a neutral expression that avoids eye contact. This behavior may share features with the "genuine" human smile that involves the corners of the eyes narrowing.[6] Scent rubbing and spraying[edit] These behaviors are thought to be a way of marking territory. Facial marking behavior is used to mark their territory as "safe". The cat rubs its cheeks on prominent objects in the preferred territory, depositing a chemical pheromone, known as a contentment pheromone. Synthetic versions of the feline facial pheromone are available commercially.[7][8] Cats have anal sacs or scent glands. Scent is deposited on the feces as it is eliminated. Unlike intact male cats, female and neutered male cats usually do not spray urine. Spraying is accomplished by backing up against a vertical surface and spraying a jet of urine on that surface. Unlike a dog's penis, a cat's penis points backward. Males neutered in adulthood may still spray after neutering. Urinating on horizontal surfaces in the home outside the litter box may indicate dissatisfaction with the box, due to a variety of factors such as substrate texture, cleanliness and privacy. It can also be a sign of urinary tract problems. Male cats on poor diets are susceptible to crystal formation in the urine, which can block the urethra and create a medical emergency. Body postures[edit] A cat's posture communicates its emotions. It is best to observe cats' natural behavior when they are by themselves, with humans, and with other animals.[9] Their postures can be friendly or aggressive, depending on the situation. Some of the most basic and familiar cat postures include:[10][11] Relaxed posture – The cat is seen lying on the side or sitting. Its breathing is slow to normal, with legs bent, or hind legs laid out or extended. The tail is loosely wrapped, extended, or held up. It also hangs down loosely when the cat is standing. Stretching posture – another posture indicating the cat is relaxed.Cat yawning postureYawning posture – either by itself or in conjunction with a stretch: another posture of a relaxed cat. Alert posture – The cat is lying on its belly, or it may be sitting. Its back is almost horizontal when standing and moving. Its breathing is normal, with its legs bent or extended (when standing). Its tail is curved back or straight upward, and there may be twitching while the tail is positioned downward. Tense posture – The cat is lying on its belly, with the back of its body lower than its upper body (slinking) when standing or moving back. Its legs, including the hind legs, are bent, and its front legs are extended when standing. Its tail is close to the body, tensed or curled downward. There can be twitching when the cat is standing up. Anxious/ovulating posture – The cat is lying on its belly. The back of the body is visibly lower than the front part when the cat is standing or moving. Its breathing may be fast, and its legs are tucked under its body. The tail is close to the body and may be curled forward (or close to the body when standing), with the tip of the tail moving up and down or side to side. Fearful posture – The cat is lying on its belly or crouching directly on top of its paws. Its entire body may be shaking and very near the ground when standing up. Breathing is fast, with the cat's legs bent near the surface, and its tail is curled and very close to its body when standing on all fours. Confident posture – The cat may walk around in a more comfortable manner with its tail up to the sky, indicating its importance. Cats often walk through houses with their tail standing up high above them, making them look grander and more elegant. Terrified posture – The cat is crouched directly on top of its paws, with visible shaking seen in some parts of the body. Its tail is close to the body, and can be standing up, together with its hair on the back. The legs are very stiff or even bent to increase their size. Typically, cats avoid contact when they feel threatened, although they can resort to varying degrees of aggression when they feel cornered, or when escape is impossible.[12] Relaxing cat Stretching cat Yawning cat Yawning kitten Alert cat Tense cat Fearful cat Terrified cat Grooming[edit] Cat grooming itself Oral grooming for domestic and feral cats is a common behavior; recent studies on domestic cats show that they spend about 8% of resting time grooming themselves. Grooming is extremely important not only to clean themselves but also to ensure ectoparasite control. Fleas tend to be the most common ectoparasite of cats, and some studies allude to indirect evidence that grooming in cats is effective in removing fleas. Cats not only use their tongue for grooming to control ectoparasites, and scratch grooming may also aid in dislodging fleas from the head and neck.[13] Kneading[edit] Main article: Kneading (cats) Classic kneading of a cat Kittens "knead" the breast while suckling, using the forelimbs one at a time in an alternating pattern to push against the mammary glands to stimulate lactation in the mother. Cats carry these infantile behaviors beyond nursing and into adulthood. Some cats "nurse," i.e. suck, on clothing or bedding during kneading. The cat exerts firm downward pressure with its paw, opening its toes to expose its claws, then closes its claws as it lifts its paw. The process takes place with alternate paws at intervals of one to two seconds. The cat may knead while sitting on its owner's lap, which may prove painful if the cat has sharp claws. Because most of the preferred "domestic traits" are neotenous, or juvenile traits that persist in the adult, kneading may be a relic juvenile behavior retained in adult domestic cats.[14] It may also stimulate the cat and make it feel good, in the same manner as a human stretching. Kneading is often a precursor to sleeping. Many cats purr while kneading. They also purr mostly when newborn, when feeding, or when trying to feed on their mother's teat. The common association between the two behaviors may corroborate the evidence in favor of the origin of kneading as a remnant instinct.[15] Panting[edit] A cat panting Unlike dogs, panting is a rare occurrence in cats, except in warm weather environments. Cats may pant in response to anxiety, fear or excitement. Panting can also be caused by play, exercise, or stress from things like car rides. However, if panting is excessive or the cat appears in distress, it may be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as a nasal blockage, heartworm disease, head trauma, or drug poisoning.[16] In many cases, feline panting, especially if accompanied by other symptoms, such as coughing or shallow breathing (dyspnea), is considered to be abnormal, and should be treated as a medical emergency.[17] Reflexes[edit] Righting reflex[edit] Main article: Cat righting reflex Chronophotography of a falling cat by Étienne-Jules Marey, 1894 The righting reflex is the attempt of cats to land on their feet at the completion of a jump or a fall. They can do this more easily than other animals due to their flexible spine, floating collarbone, and loose skin. Cats also use vision and their vestibular apparatus to help tell which way to turn. They can then stretch themselves out and relax their muscles. The righting reflex does not always result in the cat landing on its feet.[18] Freeze reflex[edit] Adult cats are able to make use of pinch-induced behavioural inhibition to induce a "freeze reflex" in their young, which enables them to be transported by the neck without resisting. This reflex, also known as clipnosis,[19][20] can also be exhibited by adults. Eating patterns[edit] Cat eating "cat grass" Calico cat drinking water from a glass. Cats are obligate carnivores and do not do well on herbivore diets. In the wild they usually hunt smaller mammals to keep themselves nourished. Many cats find and chew small quantities of long grass, but this is not for its nutritional value per se. The eating of grass seems to stem from feline ancestry and has nothing to do with dietary requirements. It is believed that feline ancestors instead ate grass to purge intestinal parasites.[21] Cats have no sweet taste receptors on their tongue and thus cannot taste sweet things at all. Cats mainly smell for their food, and what they taste for is amino acids instead. This may be a cause of cats being diagnosed with diabetes. The food that domestic cats get has a lot of carbohydrates in it, and a high sugar content cannot be efficiently processed by the digestive system of cats.[22] Cats drink water by lapping the surface with their tongue. A fraction of a teaspoon of water is taken up with each lap. Although some desert cats are able to obtain much of their water needs through the flesh of their prey, most cats come to bodies of water to drink.[23] Eating patterns are another indicator to understand behavior changes in domestic cats. Changes in typical eating patterns can be an early signal for possible physical or psychological health problems. [24] A cat's eating pattern in a domestic setting is essential for the cat and owner bond to form. This happens because cats form attachments to households that regularly feed them.[25] Some cats ask for food dozens of times a day, including at night, with rubbing, pacing, meowing, or sometimes loud purring. Sleeping patterns[edit] More than half of cats sleep between 12 and 18 hours a day, sometimes even more. Most cats sleep more as they age. [26] This can explain why cats are crepuscular, mostly being active during the night.[27] Excretion[edit] Cats tend to bury their feces after defecating and can be attracted to a litter box if it has attractant in it. Cats will also generally defecate more in those litter boxes.[28] Socialization[edit] Socialization is defined as a member of a specific group learning to be part of that group.[29] It is said to be a continuous learning process that allows an individual to learn the necessary skills and behaviors required for a particular social position.[30] Cats, domestic or wild, do participate in social behaviors, even though it is thought that most cat species (besides lions) are solitary, anti-social animals.[31] Under certain circumstances, such as food availability, shelter, or protection, cats can be seen in groups.[31] The social behaviors that cats participate in are colony organization, social learning, socialization between cats, and socialization with humans. Colony organization[edit] Free-living domestic cats tend to form colonies.[32] Small colonies consist of one female, known as a queen, and her kittens. Large colonies consist of several queens and their kittens.[32] Male cats are present in both types of colonies and serve the purpose of reproduction and defending territory. Within these colonies altruistic behavior occurs. This means that if an expecting queen helps another queen that just gave birth, then the helping queen will get help in return when she gives birth.[32] Although free living cats are found in colonies, stable social order, like that of the lion, does not exist.[31] Free living cats usually are found in colonies for protection against predators, and for food availability.[31] Although there are many advantages of group living, such as easy access to mates, and defensive measures to protect food, there are also disadvantages, such as sexual competition for mates. If the group gets too big, fights may break out over food.[32] Social learning[edit] Cats are observational learners.[32][33] This type of learning emerges early in a cat's life,[34] and has been shown in many laboratory studies. Young kittens learn to hunt from their mothers by observing their techniques when catching prey.[32] The mother ensures that her kittens learn hunting techniques by first bringing dead prey to the litter, then live prey. She demonstrates the techniques required for successful capture to her kittens by bringing live prey to the litter for the kittens to catch themselves.[32] Prey-catching behavior of kittens improves over time when mothers are present .[35] Observational learning for cats can be described in terms of the drive to complete the behavior, the cue that initiates the behavior, the response to the cue, and the reward for completing the behavior.[34] This is shown when cats learn predatory behavior from their mothers. The drive is hunger, the cue is the prey, the response is to catch the prey, and the reward is to relieve the hunger sensation. Kittens also show observational learning when they are socializing with humans. They are more likely to initiate socialization with humans when their mothers are exhibiting non-aggressive and non-defensive behaviors.[32] Even though mothers spend most time with their kittens, male cats play an important role by breaking up fights among litter mates.[32] Observational learning is not limited to kittens. It can also be observed during adulthood. Studies have been done with adult cats performing a task, such as pressing a lever after a visual cue.[33] Adult cats that see others performing a task learn to perform the same task faster than those who did not witness another cat performing it.[33] Socialization between cats[edit] When strange cats meet, they ideally cautiously allow each other to smell their hindquarters, but this does not happen very often.[36] Usually when strange cats meet, one cat makes a sudden movement that puts the other cat into a defensive mode. The subordinate cat will then draw in on itself and prepare to attack if needed.[36] If an attack happens, the subordinate cat will usually run away, but this does not happen all the time and it could lead to a tomcat duel.[36] Dominance is also seen as an underlying factor for how conspecifics -- members of the same species -- interact with each other. Dominance can be seen among cats in multi-cat households. It can be seen when other cats submit to the dominant cat. Dominance includes such behaviors as the subordinate cat walking around the dominant cat, waiting for the dominant cat to walk past, avoiding eye contact, crouching, lying on its side (defensive posture), and retreating when the dominant cat approaches.[32] The dominant cat presents a specific body posture as well. Its ears are straight up, the base of its tail is arched, and it looks directly at the subordinate cat.[32] Dominant cats are usually not aggressive, but if a subordinate cat blocks food they may become aggressive.[37] When this aggressive behavior occurs, it can also lead to the dominant cat preventing subordinate cats from eating and using the litter box.[32] This can cause the subordinate cat to defecate somewhere else and create problems with human interaction.[32] Social conflicts[edit] Two cats fighting Social conflicts among cats depend solely on the behavior of the cats. Some research has shown that cats rarely pick fights, but when they do, it's usually for protecting food and/or litters, and defending territory.[37] The first sign of an imminent tomcat duel is when both cats draw themselves up high on their legs, all hair along the middle of their backs stands straight up, and they mew and howl loudly as they approach each other.[36] The steps the cats make become slower and shorter the closer they get to each other. Once they are close enough to attack, they pause slightly, and then one cat leaps and tries to bite the nape of the other cat.[36] The other cat has no choice but to retaliate, and both cats roll aggressively on the ground, with loud and intense screams by both.[36] After some time the cats separate and stand face to face to begin the attack all over again. This can go on for some time until one cat does not get up again and remains seated.[36] The defeated cat does not move until the victor has completed a sniff of the area and moves outside the fighting area. Once this happens, the defeated cat leaves the area, ending the duel.[36] Females may also fight with each other, and male-female fights can occur as well. Cats may need to be reintroduced or separated to avoid fights in a closed household. Socialization with humans[edit] Cats have learned how to develop their vocals in order to converse with humans, trying to tell humans what they want. One way cats and humans interact is through "head bunting," in which a cat rubs its head on a human in order to leave its scent to claim territory and create a bond.[38] Cats can sometimes take cues from human pointing and from the direction of human gazes. They can sometimes discriminate between, and sometimes even correlate, human facial expressions, attentional states, and voices. Besides its own name, a cat can sometimes learn the names of humans and other cats.[39] Cats age three to nine weeks are sensitive to human socialization;[40] after this period socialization can be less effective.[41] Studies have shown that the earlier a kitten is handled, the less fearful it will be toward humans.[41] Other factors that can enhance socialization are having many people handle the kitten frequently, the presence of the mother, and feeding.[40][41] The presence of the mother is important because cats are observational learners. If the mother is comfortable around humans, it can reduce anxiety in the kitten and promote the kitten-human relationship.[40][42] Feral kittens around two to seven weeks old can be socialized, usually within a month of capture.[43] Some species of cats cannot be socialized toward humans because of factors such as genetic influence and in some cases specific learning experiences.[43] The best way to get a kitten to socialize is to handle it for many hours a week.[43] The process is made easier if there is another socialized cat present but not necessarily in the same space as the feral cat. If the handler can get a cat to urinate in the litter tray, then the others in a litter will usually follow. Initial contact with thick gloves is highly recommended until trust is established, usually within the first week. Socializing an adult is challenging. Socialized adult feral cats tend to trust only those they trusted in their socialization period, and can be very fearful around strangers.[43] Cats can be companion animals. Studies have shown that these cats provide many physiological and psychological benefits for the owner.[41] Other aspects of cat behavior that are deemed advantageous for the human-cat bond are cat hygiene (cats are known for good hygiene)[44] and they do not have to be taken outside (use of the litter box). Cats are perfect for smaller spaces, and they have no problems with being left alone for extended periods.[41] Even though there are a number of benefits of owning a cat, there are a number of problematic behaviors that can affect the human-cat relationship. One behavior is when cats attack people by clawing and biting.[33] This often occurs spontaneously or is triggered by sudden movements.[33] Another problematic behavior is the "petting and biting syndrome," which involves the cat being petted and then suddenly attacking and running away.[33] Other problems are house soiling, scratching furniture, and when a cat brings dead prey into the house.[44] There are 52 measured personality traits in cats, with one study saying "five reliable personality factors were found using principal axis factor analysis: neuroticism, extroversion, dominance, impulsiveness and agreeableness."[45] Predatory behavior[edit] A domestic cat with its prey, a deer mouse Cats are natural predators. When allowed to roam outdoors, many cats will engage in predation on wildlife. Understanding an indoor cat's personality can go a long way toward satisfying their instincts and avoid potentially inconvenient behavior (such as sudden hissing, dashing around the house, or climbing the curtains). Environmental enrichment items include:[46] A good-sized cat tree, with scratching posts Toys that provide a release for their predatory instincts[47] A well kept litter box or toilet Fresh water and dry cat food Social interaction Environment[edit] Cats like to organize their environment based on their needs. Like their ancestors, domestic cats still have an inherent desire to maintain an independent territory but are generally content to live with other cats for company as they easily get bored. Living alone for a longer time may cause them to forget how to communicate with other cats.[48] Sometimes adding a kitten to a household can be a bad idea. If there already is an older cat present and another cat is added, it may be better to get another older cat that has been socialized with other cats. When a kitten is introduced to a mature cat, that cat may show feline asocial aggression, in which they feel threatened and act aggressive to drive off the intruder. If this happens, the kitten and the cat should be separated and slowly introduced by rubbing towels on the animals and presenting the towel to the other.[49] Cats use scent and pheromones to help organize their territory by marking prominent objects. If these objects or scents are removed, it upsets the cat's perception of its environment. See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cat behavior. Cat behaviorist Cat communication Cat play and toys Ethology Cat training References[edit] ^ Shipley, C; Buchwald, J.S; Carterette, E.C (January 1988). "The role of auditory feedback in the vocalizations of cats". Experimental Brain Research. 69 (2): 431–438. doi:10.1007/bf00247589. PMID 3345817. S2CID 31184802. ^ "Cats." Gale In Context Online Collection, Gale, 2018. Gale In Context: College, link.gale.com/apps/doc/LQLWOQ026686444/GPS?u=brookdalecc&sid=bookmark-GPS&xid=7afb5516. Accessed 10 Apr. 2023. ^ Kelley, JaneA (2017-06-05). "Scientists Discover New Meaning for Cat Chattering". Catster. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ "The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language". Tuft + Paw. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ Pachel, Christopher (May 2014). "Intercat Aggression: Restoring Harmony in the Home: A Guide for Practitioners". The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice. 44 (3): 565–579. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2014.01.007. PMID 24766700. ^ Humphrey, Tasmin; Proops, Leanne; Forman, Jemma; Spooner, Rebecca; McComb, Karen (2020-10-05). "The role of cat eye narrowing movements in cat–human communication". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 16503. Bibcode:2020NatSR..1016503H. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-73426-0. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 7536207. PMID 33020542. ^ Dr. Jennifer Coates, DVM (22 April 2013). "Synthetic Feline Facial Pheromones: Making Recommendations in the Absence of Definitive Data, Part 1". petMD. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2014. ^ "Feliway". Archived from the original on 2015-05-02. Retrieved 2015-02-03. ^ "The Indoor Cat Initiative" (PDF). The Ohio State University, College of Veterinary Medicine. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-18. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ "Test to determine how well you know feline body language". Archived from the original on 2018-06-20. Retrieved 2016-09-12. ^ An Ethogram for Behavioral Studies of the Domestic Cat. UFAW Animal Welfare Research Report No 8. UK Cat Behavior Working Group, 1995. ^ "Reading Your Cat". Animal Planet. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ Eckstein, Robert A.; Hart, Benjamin L. (2000). "Grooming and Control of Fleas in Cats". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 68 (2): 141–50. doi:10.1016/s0168-1591(00)00095-2. PMID 10771322. ^ Schwartz, Stefanie (June 2003). "Separation anxiety syndrome in dogs and cats". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 222 (11): 1526–32. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.222.1526. PMID 12784957. ^ McPherson, F.J; Chenoweth, P.J (April 2012). "Mammalian sexual dimorphism". Animal Reproduction Science. 131 (3–4): 109–122. doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.02.007. PMID 22482798. ^ Spielman, Dr. Bari. "Panting in Cats: Is It Normal?". Retrieved 2010-01-07. ^ "Cat Panting Explained". The Cat Health Guide. Retrieved 2011-07-02. ^ Adams, Cecil (1996-07-19). "Do cats always land unharmed on their feet, no matter how far they fall?". The Straight Dope. Chicago Reader. Retrieved 2007-11-07. ^ Robbie Gonzalez (22 November 2013). "The one myth about cats that's actually true". Gizmodo. Retrieved 21 May 2018. ^ Pozza, M. E.; Stella, J. L.; Chappuis-Gagnon, A. C.; Wagner, S. O.; Buffington, C. A. (2008). "Pinch-induced behavioral inhibition ('clipnosis') in domestic cats". Journal of Feline Medicine & Surgery. 10 (1): 82–7. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2007.10.008. PMID 18222719. S2CID 46156902. ^ Hart, Benjamin (December 2008). "Why do dogs and cats eat grass?". Veterinary Medicine. 103 (12): 648. ^ Li, Xia (July 2006). "Cats lack a sweet taste receptor". The Journal of Nutrition. 136 (7): 1932S–1934S. doi:10.1093/jn/136.7.1932s. PMC 2063449. PMID 16772462. ^ Macdonald, Rogers (1984). "Nutrition of the domestic cat, a mammalian carnivore". Annual Review of Nutrition. 4 (1): 521–562. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.4.1.521. PMID 6380542. ^ "What You Need To Do If Your Cat Not Eating Much But Acting Normal". Walk With Cat. 2019-09-26. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ Bradshaw, J. W. S., & Cook, S. E. (1996). Patterns of Pet Cat Behaviour at Feeding Occasions. Applied Animal Behavioral Science 47(1), 61-64. DOI: doi.org/10.1016/0168-1591(95)01011-4 ^ Izawa, Masako (1983). "Daily Activities of the Feral Cat Felis catus LINN.*". Retrieved 1 May 2023. ^ Piccione, Giuseppe; Marafioti, Simona; Giannetto, Claudia; Panzera, Michele; Fazio, Francesco (2013-07-01). "Daily rhythm of total activity pattern in domestic cats (Felis silvestris catus) maintained in two different housing conditions". Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 8 (4): 189–194. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2012.09.004. ISSN 1558-7878. ^ Frayne, Jennifer; Murray, Sarah Macdonald; Croney, Candace; Flickinger, Elizabeth; Edwards, Michelle; Shoveller, Anna Kate (2019). "The Behavioural Effects of Innovative Litter Developed to Attract Cats". Animals. 9 (9): 683. doi:10.3390/ani9090683. PMC 6770919. PMID 31540016. ^ "Socialization". Encyclopedia Britannica. October 18, 2018. ^ "Socialization". Dictionary.com. October 18, 2018. ^ a b c d Spotte, Stephen (2014). Free-Ranging Cats: Behaviour, Ecology, & Management. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. pp. 49–59. ISBN 978-1-118-88401-0. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Crowell-Davis, Sharon, L. (2007). "Cat Behaviour: Social Organization, Communication, & Development". The Welfare of Cats. Netherlands: Springer, Dordrecht. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ a b c d e f Bradshaw, John W. S. (1992). The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. Wallingford: CAB International. pp. 78, 198–200. ISBN 0-85198-715-X. ^ a b Alder, H.E. (1955). "Some Factors of Observational Learning". The Journal of Genetic Psychology. 86 (1): 159–177. doi:10.1080/00221325.1955.10532903. PMID 14354164. ProQuest 1297110751. ^ Caro, T. M. (1980). "Effects of the Mother, Object Play, and Adult Experience on Predation in Cats". Behavioral and Neural Biology. 29 (1): 29–51. doi:10.1016/S0163-1047(80)92456-5. PMID 7387584. ^ a b c d e f g h Leyhausen, Paul (1979). Cat Behaviour: The Predatory & Social Behaviour of Domestic & Wild Cats. New York, New York: Garland Publishing Inc. pp. 164–216, 227–231. ISBN 978-0-8240-7017-5. ^ a b Beadle, Muriel (1977). The Cat: History, Biology, and Behaviour. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 100–111. ISBN 978-0-671-22451-6. ^ "Bunting Behavior – Answers, Why, When & How of Cat Behavior Issues by Pam Johnson-Bennett". www.catbehaviorassociates.com. 2012-05-03. Retrieved 2018-12-03. ^ Takagi, Saho; Saito, Atsuko; Arahori, Minori; Chijiiwa, Hitomi; Koyasu, Hikari; Nagasawa, Miho; Kikusui, Takefumi; Fujita, Kazuo; Kuroshima, Hika (13 April 2022). "Cats learn the names of their friend cats in their daily lives". Scientific Reports. 12 (1): 6155. Bibcode:2022NatSR..12.6155T. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-10261-5. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 9007945. PMID 35418204. S2CID 248155872. ^ a b c Turner, Dennis C.; Bateson, Patrick (1988). The Domestic Cat: The Biology of its Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 112–113, 159–168. ISBN 978-0-521-35447-9. ^ a b c d e Bernstein, Penny L. (2007). "The Human-Cat Relationship". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 47–89. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ "Why Does My Cat Follow Me Everywhere In The House". Walk With Cat. 2019-10-03. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ a b c d Casey, Rachel; Bradshaw, John (November 2008). "The effects of additional socialisation for kittens in a rescue centre on their behaviour and suitability as a pet". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 114 (1–2): 196–205. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2008.01.003. ^ a b Heath, Sarah E. (2007). "Behaviour Problems and Welfare". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 91–107. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ Roetman, Philip; Kikillus, K. Heidy; Chiera, Belinda; Tindle, Hayley; Quinton, Gillian; Litchfield, Carla A. (2017-08-23). "The 'Feline Five': An exploration of personality in pet cats (Felis catus)". PLOS ONE. 12 (8): e0183455. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1283455L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0183455. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 5568325. PMID 28832622. ^ Herron, Meghan. "Environmental Enrichment for Indoor Cats" (PDF). Ohio State University. OSU. ^ "The Dangers of Strings, Ribbons, and Yarn for Cats". ^ "One Kitten or Two?". Archived from the original on 2018-06-21. Retrieved 2015-09-17. ^ Beaver, Bonnie (September 2004). "Fractious cats and feline aggression". Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 6 (1): 13–18. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2003.09.011. PMID 15123162. S2CID 525291. Bishko, Adriane. "What Your Cat's Body Language Is Saying". WebMD Pet. WebMD. Retrieved 1 December 2018. vteDomestic catsFelinology Anatomy Genetics Dwarf cat Kitten Odd-eyed cat Squitten Coat genetics Bicolor cat Black cat Calico cat Tabby cat Tortoiseshell cat Health Aging Declawing Diet dental health senior Vaccination Behavior Cat–dog relationship Catfight Catnip valerian Communication Meow Purr Kneading Intelligence Play and toys Righting reflex Senses Human–catinteraction Ailurophobia Cat cafés Cat killers Cat massage Cat meat Cat-scratch disease Cat show Cats in ancient Egypt Cultural depictions fictional Internet Feral cat Cats and Islam Lolcat National Cat Day Pet cat Puppy cat Working cat Bodega cat Farm cat Library cat Ship's cat Zoonosis Registries American Cat Fanciers Association Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana Canadian Cat Association Cat Aficionado Association Cat Fanciers' Association Fédération Internationale Féline Governing Council of the Cat Fancy New Zealand Cat Fancy Southern Africa Cat Council The International Cat Association World Cat Congress World Cat Federation Breeds(full list)(experimental)Fullydomestic Abyssinian American Curl American Shorthair Balinese Brazilian Shorthair British Shorthair Birman Bombay Burmese Burmilla California Spangled Chartreux Chinese Li Hua Colorpoint Shorthair Cornish Rex Cymric Devon Rex Donskoy Egyptian Mau European Shorthair Exotic Shorthair German Rex Himalayan Japanese Bobtail Javanese Khao Manee Korat Kurilian Bobtail Lykoi Maine Coon Manx Munchkin Neva Masquerade Norwegian Forest Ocicat Ojos Azules Oriental Shorthair Persian Peterbald Pixie-bob Ragdoll Ragamuffin Russian Blue Scottish Fold Selkirk Rex Siamese Siberian Singapura Snowshoe Somali Sphynx Thai Traditional Persian Tonkinese Toyger Turkish Angora Turkish Van Hybrid Bengal Chausie Highlander Savannah Serengeti Landraces Aegean Cyprus Domestic long-haired Domestic short-haired Kellas Sokoke Van Diseases anddisorders Acne Asthma Calicivirus Congenital sensorineural deafness Feline corneal sequestrum Flea Coccidia Heartworm Hepatic lipidosis Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Immunodeficiency virus Infectious peritonitis Leukemia virus Lower urinary tract disease Panleukopenia Giardiasis Polydactyly Rabies Ringworm Tritrichomonas foetus Roundworm Skin disorders Tick Toxoplasmosis Viral rhinotracheitis Cats by country Australia Canada Japan New Zealand United Kingdom United States Related List of individual cats List of oldest cats Cats in folklore Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cat_behavior&oldid=1177443160" Categories: Cat behaviorAnimal communicationEthologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from October 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from July 2012All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesCommons category link is on WikidataArticles containing video clips This page was last edited on 27 September 2023, at 16:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Communication Toggle Communication subsection 1.1Body language 1.1.1The tail 1.1.2The eyes 1.2Scent rubbing and spraying 1.3Body postures 2Grooming 3Kneading 4Panting 5Reflexes Toggle Reflexes subsection 5.1Righting reflex 5.2Freeze reflex 6Eating patterns 7Sleeping patterns 8Excretion 9Socialization Toggle Socialization subsection 9.1Colony organization 9.2Social learning 9.3Socialization between cats 9.3.1Social conflicts 9.4Socialization with humans 10Predatory behavior 11Environment 12See also 13References Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Cat behavior 3 languages ČeštinaEspañol한국어 Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Behavior of cats This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Cat behavior" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Cat behavior is a cat's behavior and responses to events and other stimuli. Cat behavior includes body language, elimination habits, aggression, play, communication, hunting, grooming, urine marking, and face rubbing. It varies among individuals, colonies, and breeds. Communication and sociability can vary greatly among individual cats. In a family with many cats, the interactions can change depending on which individuals are present and how restricted the territory and resources are. One or more individuals may become aggressive: fighting may occur with the attack, resulting in scratches and deep bite wounds. Communication[edit] Main article: Cat communication A staring cat Kittens vocalize early in development. Some examples of different vocalizations are described below.[1] Purring - means that the cat is either content or is self-soothing due to fear Meowing - a frequently used greeting. A mother meows when interacting with her young. Meows can also be used when a cat wishes for attention. [2] Hissing or spitting - indicates an angry or defensive cat. Yowling - means that the cat is in distress or feeling aggressive. Chattering - occurs when hunting or tracking potential prey. This consists of quick chirps made while the mouth vibrates. The gaze is fixed and staring. This behavior may be in response to a surge of adrenaline or may be caused by the anticipation of a pending hunt.[3] Body language[edit] Cats greeting by rubbing against each other; the upright "question mark shape" tails indicate happiness or friendship Cats rely strongly on body language to communicate. A cat may rub against an object or lick a person. Much of a cat's body language is through its tail, ears, head position, and back posture. The tail[edit] Observing how a cat holds its tail can give a good sense of the cat’s current temperament. Held high, may have a slight curl forward - a sign of friendliness. The cat is happy, content, and comfortable. The tail may quiver or vibrate if the cat is excited. Held low and tucked under - a sign of fear or unease. The cat is attempting to make itself a smaller target to potential threats. Flicking, twitching - a sign of agitation. The cat is on high alert or is upset, and is not receptive to interaction. Cats may also flick their tails in an oscillating, snake-like motion, or abruptly from side to side, often just before pouncing on an object or animal. [4] The eyes[edit] When cats greet another cat in their vicinity, they can do a slow, languid, long blink to communicate affection if they trust the person or animal they are in contact with. One way to communicate love and trust to a cat is to say its name, get its attention, look it in the eyes and then slowly blink at it to emulate trust and love. They may return the gesture.[5] In a study of 18 cats, the cat behavior of several half-blinks followed by a prolonged eye narrowing or eye closure was found to be a positive emotional response. When a familiar human slow-blinks towards a cat, the cat tends to approach the human more frequently than if the human has a neutral expression that avoids eye contact. This behavior may share features with the "genuine" human smile that involves the corners of the eyes narrowing.[6] Scent rubbing and spraying[edit] These behaviors are thought to be a way of marking territory. Facial marking behavior is used to mark their territory as "safe". The cat rubs its cheeks on prominent objects in the preferred territory, depositing a chemical pheromone, known as a contentment pheromone. Synthetic versions of the feline facial pheromone are available commercially.[7][8] Cats have anal sacs or scent glands. Scent is deposited on the feces as it is eliminated. Unlike intact male cats, female and neutered male cats usually do not spray urine. Spraying is accomplished by backing up against a vertical surface and spraying a jet of urine on that surface. Unlike a dog's penis, a cat's penis points backward. Males neutered in adulthood may still spray after neutering. Urinating on horizontal surfaces in the home outside the litter box may indicate dissatisfaction with the box, due to a variety of factors such as substrate texture, cleanliness and privacy. It can also be a sign of urinary tract problems. Male cats on poor diets are susceptible to crystal formation in the urine, which can block the urethra and create a medical emergency. Body postures[edit] A cat's posture communicates its emotions. It is best to observe cats' natural behavior when they are by themselves, with humans, and with other animals.[9] Their postures can be friendly or aggressive, depending on the situation. Some of the most basic and familiar cat postures include:[10][11] Relaxed posture – The cat is seen lying on the side or sitting. Its breathing is slow to normal, with legs bent, or hind legs laid out or extended. The tail is loosely wrapped, extended, or held up. It also hangs down loosely when the cat is standing. Stretching posture – another posture indicating the cat is relaxed.Cat yawning postureYawning posture – either by itself or in conjunction with a stretch: another posture of a relaxed cat. Alert posture – The cat is lying on its belly, or it may be sitting. Its back is almost horizontal when standing and moving. Its breathing is normal, with its legs bent or extended (when standing). Its tail is curved back or straight upward, and there may be twitching while the tail is positioned downward. Tense posture – The cat is lying on its belly, with the back of its body lower than its upper body (slinking) when standing or moving back. Its legs, including the hind legs, are bent, and its front legs are extended when standing. Its tail is close to the body, tensed or curled downward. There can be twitching when the cat is standing up. Anxious/ovulating posture – The cat is lying on its belly. The back of the body is visibly lower than the front part when the cat is standing or moving. Its breathing may be fast, and its legs are tucked under its body. The tail is close to the body and may be curled forward (or close to the body when standing), with the tip of the tail moving up and down or side to side. Fearful posture – The cat is lying on its belly or crouching directly on top of its paws. Its entire body may be shaking and very near the ground when standing up. Breathing is fast, with the cat's legs bent near the surface, and its tail is curled and very close to its body when standing on all fours. Confident posture – The cat may walk around in a more comfortable manner with its tail up to the sky, indicating its importance. Cats often walk through houses with their tail standing up high above them, making them look grander and more elegant. Terrified posture – The cat is crouched directly on top of its paws, with visible shaking seen in some parts of the body. Its tail is close to the body, and can be standing up, together with its hair on the back. The legs are very stiff or even bent to increase their size. Typically, cats avoid contact when they feel threatened, although they can resort to varying degrees of aggression when they feel cornered, or when escape is impossible.[12] Relaxing cat Stretching cat Yawning cat Yawning kitten Alert cat Tense cat Fearful cat Terrified cat Grooming[edit] Cat grooming itself Oral grooming for domestic and feral cats is a common behavior; recent studies on domestic cats show that they spend about 8% of resting time grooming themselves. Grooming is extremely important not only to clean themselves but also to ensure ectoparasite control. Fleas tend to be the most common ectoparasite of cats, and some studies allude to indirect evidence that grooming in cats is effective in removing fleas. Cats not only use their tongue for grooming to control ectoparasites, and scratch grooming may also aid in dislodging fleas from the head and neck.[13] Kneading[edit] Main article: Kneading (cats) Classic kneading of a cat Kittens "knead" the breast while suckling, using the forelimbs one at a time in an alternating pattern to push against the mammary glands to stimulate lactation in the mother. Cats carry these infantile behaviors beyond nursing and into adulthood. Some cats "nurse," i.e. suck, on clothing or bedding during kneading. The cat exerts firm downward pressure with its paw, opening its toes to expose its claws, then closes its claws as it lifts its paw. The process takes place with alternate paws at intervals of one to two seconds. The cat may knead while sitting on its owner's lap, which may prove painful if the cat has sharp claws. Because most of the preferred "domestic traits" are neotenous, or juvenile traits that persist in the adult, kneading may be a relic juvenile behavior retained in adult domestic cats.[14] It may also stimulate the cat and make it feel good, in the same manner as a human stretching. Kneading is often a precursor to sleeping. Many cats purr while kneading. They also purr mostly when newborn, when feeding, or when trying to feed on their mother's teat. The common association between the two behaviors may corroborate the evidence in favor of the origin of kneading as a remnant instinct.[15] Panting[edit] A cat panting Unlike dogs, panting is a rare occurrence in cats, except in warm weather environments. Cats may pant in response to anxiety, fear or excitement. Panting can also be caused by play, exercise, or stress from things like car rides. However, if panting is excessive or the cat appears in distress, it may be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as a nasal blockage, heartworm disease, head trauma, or drug poisoning.[16] In many cases, feline panting, especially if accompanied by other symptoms, such as coughing or shallow breathing (dyspnea), is considered to be abnormal, and should be treated as a medical emergency.[17] Reflexes[edit] Righting reflex[edit] Main article: Cat righting reflex Chronophotography of a falling cat by Étienne-Jules Marey, 1894 The righting reflex is the attempt of cats to land on their feet at the completion of a jump or a fall. They can do this more easily than other animals due to their flexible spine, floating collarbone, and loose skin. Cats also use vision and their vestibular apparatus to help tell which way to turn. They can then stretch themselves out and relax their muscles. The righting reflex does not always result in the cat landing on its feet.[18] Freeze reflex[edit] Adult cats are able to make use of pinch-induced behavioural inhibition to induce a "freeze reflex" in their young, which enables them to be transported by the neck without resisting. This reflex, also known as clipnosis,[19][20] can also be exhibited by adults. Eating patterns[edit] Cat eating "cat grass" Calico cat drinking water from a glass. Cats are obligate carnivores and do not do well on herbivore diets. In the wild they usually hunt smaller mammals to keep themselves nourished. Many cats find and chew small quantities of long grass, but this is not for its nutritional value per se. The eating of grass seems to stem from feline ancestry and has nothing to do with dietary requirements. It is believed that feline ancestors instead ate grass to purge intestinal parasites.[21] Cats have no sweet taste receptors on their tongue and thus cannot taste sweet things at all. Cats mainly smell for their food, and what they taste for is amino acids instead. This may be a cause of cats being diagnosed with diabetes. The food that domestic cats get has a lot of carbohydrates in it, and a high sugar content cannot be efficiently processed by the digestive system of cats.[22] Cats drink water by lapping the surface with their tongue. A fraction of a teaspoon of water is taken up with each lap. Although some desert cats are able to obtain much of their water needs through the flesh of their prey, most cats come to bodies of water to drink.[23] Eating patterns are another indicator to understand behavior changes in domestic cats. Changes in typical eating patterns can be an early signal for possible physical or psychological health problems. [24] A cat's eating pattern in a domestic setting is essential for the cat and owner bond to form. This happens because cats form attachments to households that regularly feed them.[25] Some cats ask for food dozens of times a day, including at night, with rubbing, pacing, meowing, or sometimes loud purring. Sleeping patterns[edit] More than half of cats sleep between 12 and 18 hours a day, sometimes even more. Most cats sleep more as they age. [26] This can explain why cats are crepuscular, mostly being active during the night.[27] Excretion[edit] Cats tend to bury their feces after defecating and can be attracted to a litter box if it has attractant in it. Cats will also generally defecate more in those litter boxes.[28] Socialization[edit] Socialization is defined as a member of a specific group learning to be part of that group.[29] It is said to be a continuous learning process that allows an individual to learn the necessary skills and behaviors required for a particular social position.[30] Cats, domestic or wild, do participate in social behaviors, even though it is thought that most cat species (besides lions) are solitary, anti-social animals.[31] Under certain circumstances, such as food availability, shelter, or protection, cats can be seen in groups.[31] The social behaviors that cats participate in are colony organization, social learning, socialization between cats, and socialization with humans. Colony organization[edit] Free-living domestic cats tend to form colonies.[32] Small colonies consist of one female, known as a queen, and her kittens. Large colonies consist of several queens and their kittens.[32] Male cats are present in both types of colonies and serve the purpose of reproduction and defending territory. Within these colonies altruistic behavior occurs. This means that if an expecting queen helps another queen that just gave birth, then the helping queen will get help in return when she gives birth.[32] Although free living cats are found in colonies, stable social order, like that of the lion, does not exist.[31] Free living cats usually are found in colonies for protection against predators, and for food availability.[31] Although there are many advantages of group living, such as easy access to mates, and defensive measures to protect food, there are also disadvantages, such as sexual competition for mates. If the group gets too big, fights may break out over food.[32] Social learning[edit] Cats are observational learners.[32][33] This type of learning emerges early in a cat's life,[34] and has been shown in many laboratory studies. Young kittens learn to hunt from their mothers by observing their techniques when catching prey.[32] The mother ensures that her kittens learn hunting techniques by first bringing dead prey to the litter, then live prey. She demonstrates the techniques required for successful capture to her kittens by bringing live prey to the litter for the kittens to catch themselves.[32] Prey-catching behavior of kittens improves over time when mothers are present .[35] Observational learning for cats can be described in terms of the drive to complete the behavior, the cue that initiates the behavior, the response to the cue, and the reward for completing the behavior.[34] This is shown when cats learn predatory behavior from their mothers. The drive is hunger, the cue is the prey, the response is to catch the prey, and the reward is to relieve the hunger sensation. Kittens also show observational learning when they are socializing with humans. They are more likely to initiate socialization with humans when their mothers are exhibiting non-aggressive and non-defensive behaviors.[32] Even though mothers spend most time with their kittens, male cats play an important role by breaking up fights among litter mates.[32] Observational learning is not limited to kittens. It can also be observed during adulthood. Studies have been done with adult cats performing a task, such as pressing a lever after a visual cue.[33] Adult cats that see others performing a task learn to perform the same task faster than those who did not witness another cat performing it.[33] Socialization between cats[edit] When strange cats meet, they ideally cautiously allow each other to smell their hindquarters, but this does not happen very often.[36] Usually when strange cats meet, one cat makes a sudden movement that puts the other cat into a defensive mode. The subordinate cat will then draw in on itself and prepare to attack if needed.[36] If an attack happens, the subordinate cat will usually run away, but this does not happen all the time and it could lead to a tomcat duel.[36] Dominance is also seen as an underlying factor for how conspecifics -- members of the same species -- interact with each other. Dominance can be seen among cats in multi-cat households. It can be seen when other cats submit to the dominant cat. Dominance includes such behaviors as the subordinate cat walking around the dominant cat, waiting for the dominant cat to walk past, avoiding eye contact, crouching, lying on its side (defensive posture), and retreating when the dominant cat approaches.[32] The dominant cat presents a specific body posture as well. Its ears are straight up, the base of its tail is arched, and it looks directly at the subordinate cat.[32] Dominant cats are usually not aggressive, but if a subordinate cat blocks food they may become aggressive.[37] When this aggressive behavior occurs, it can also lead to the dominant cat preventing subordinate cats from eating and using the litter box.[32] This can cause the subordinate cat to defecate somewhere else and create problems with human interaction.[32] Social conflicts[edit] Two cats fighting Social conflicts among cats depend solely on the behavior of the cats. Some research has shown that cats rarely pick fights, but when they do, it's usually for protecting food and/or litters, and defending territory.[37] The first sign of an imminent tomcat duel is when both cats draw themselves up high on their legs, all hair along the middle of their backs stands straight up, and they mew and howl loudly as they approach each other.[36] The steps the cats make become slower and shorter the closer they get to each other. Once they are close enough to attack, they pause slightly, and then one cat leaps and tries to bite the nape of the other cat.[36] The other cat has no choice but to retaliate, and both cats roll aggressively on the ground, with loud and intense screams by both.[36] After some time the cats separate and stand face to face to begin the attack all over again. This can go on for some time until one cat does not get up again and remains seated.[36] The defeated cat does not move until the victor has completed a sniff of the area and moves outside the fighting area. Once this happens, the defeated cat leaves the area, ending the duel.[36] Females may also fight with each other, and male-female fights can occur as well. Cats may need to be reintroduced or separated to avoid fights in a closed household. Socialization with humans[edit] Cats have learned how to develop their vocals in order to converse with humans, trying to tell humans what they want. One way cats and humans interact is through "head bunting," in which a cat rubs its head on a human in order to leave its scent to claim territory and create a bond.[38] Cats can sometimes take cues from human pointing and from the direction of human gazes. They can sometimes discriminate between, and sometimes even correlate, human facial expressions, attentional states, and voices. Besides its own name, a cat can sometimes learn the names of humans and other cats.[39] Cats age three to nine weeks are sensitive to human socialization;[40] after this period socialization can be less effective.[41] Studies have shown that the earlier a kitten is handled, the less fearful it will be toward humans.[41] Other factors that can enhance socialization are having many people handle the kitten frequently, the presence of the mother, and feeding.[40][41] The presence of the mother is important because cats are observational learners. If the mother is comfortable around humans, it can reduce anxiety in the kitten and promote the kitten-human relationship.[40][42] Feral kittens around two to seven weeks old can be socialized, usually within a month of capture.[43] Some species of cats cannot be socialized toward humans because of factors such as genetic influence and in some cases specific learning experiences.[43] The best way to get a kitten to socialize is to handle it for many hours a week.[43] The process is made easier if there is another socialized cat present but not necessarily in the same space as the feral cat. If the handler can get a cat to urinate in the litter tray, then the others in a litter will usually follow. Initial contact with thick gloves is highly recommended until trust is established, usually within the first week. Socializing an adult is challenging. Socialized adult feral cats tend to trust only those they trusted in their socialization period, and can be very fearful around strangers.[43] Cats can be companion animals. Studies have shown that these cats provide many physiological and psychological benefits for the owner.[41] Other aspects of cat behavior that are deemed advantageous for the human-cat bond are cat hygiene (cats are known for good hygiene)[44] and they do not have to be taken outside (use of the litter box). Cats are perfect for smaller spaces, and they have no problems with being left alone for extended periods.[41] Even though there are a number of benefits of owning a cat, there are a number of problematic behaviors that can affect the human-cat relationship. One behavior is when cats attack people by clawing and biting.[33] This often occurs spontaneously or is triggered by sudden movements.[33] Another problematic behavior is the "petting and biting syndrome," which involves the cat being petted and then suddenly attacking and running away.[33] Other problems are house soiling, scratching furniture, and when a cat brings dead prey into the house.[44] There are 52 measured personality traits in cats, with one study saying "five reliable personality factors were found using principal axis factor analysis: neuroticism, extroversion, dominance, impulsiveness and agreeableness."[45] Predatory behavior[edit] A domestic cat with its prey, a deer mouse Cats are natural predators. When allowed to roam outdoors, many cats will engage in predation on wildlife. Understanding an indoor cat's personality can go a long way toward satisfying their instincts and avoid potentially inconvenient behavior (such as sudden hissing, dashing around the house, or climbing the curtains). Environmental enrichment items include:[46] A good-sized cat tree, with scratching posts Toys that provide a release for their predatory instincts[47] A well kept litter box or toilet Fresh water and dry cat food Social interaction Environment[edit] Cats like to organize their environment based on their needs. Like their ancestors, domestic cats still have an inherent desire to maintain an independent territory but are generally content to live with other cats for company as they easily get bored. Living alone for a longer time may cause them to forget how to communicate with other cats.[48] Sometimes adding a kitten to a household can be a bad idea. If there already is an older cat present and another cat is added, it may be better to get another older cat that has been socialized with other cats. When a kitten is introduced to a mature cat, that cat may show feline asocial aggression, in which they feel threatened and act aggressive to drive off the intruder. If this happens, the kitten and the cat should be separated and slowly introduced by rubbing towels on the animals and presenting the towel to the other.[49] Cats use scent and pheromones to help organize their territory by marking prominent objects. If these objects or scents are removed, it upsets the cat's perception of its environment. See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cat behavior. Cat behaviorist Cat communication Cat play and toys Ethology Cat training References[edit] ^ Shipley, C; Buchwald, J.S; Carterette, E.C (January 1988). "The role of auditory feedback in the vocalizations of cats". Experimental Brain Research. 69 (2): 431–438. doi:10.1007/bf00247589. PMID 3345817. S2CID 31184802. ^ "Cats." Gale In Context Online Collection, Gale, 2018. Gale In Context: College, link.gale.com/apps/doc/LQLWOQ026686444/GPS?u=brookdalecc&sid=bookmark-GPS&xid=7afb5516. Accessed 10 Apr. 2023. ^ Kelley, JaneA (2017-06-05). "Scientists Discover New Meaning for Cat Chattering". Catster. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ "The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language". Tuft + Paw. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ Pachel, Christopher (May 2014). "Intercat Aggression: Restoring Harmony in the Home: A Guide for Practitioners". The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice. 44 (3): 565–579. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2014.01.007. PMID 24766700. ^ Humphrey, Tasmin; Proops, Leanne; Forman, Jemma; Spooner, Rebecca; McComb, Karen (2020-10-05). "The role of cat eye narrowing movements in cat–human communication". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 16503. Bibcode:2020NatSR..1016503H. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-73426-0. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 7536207. PMID 33020542. ^ Dr. Jennifer Coates, DVM (22 April 2013). "Synthetic Feline Facial Pheromones: Making Recommendations in the Absence of Definitive Data, Part 1". petMD. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2014. ^ "Feliway". Archived from the original on 2015-05-02. Retrieved 2015-02-03. ^ "The Indoor Cat Initiative" (PDF). The Ohio State University, College of Veterinary Medicine. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-18. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ "Test to determine how well you know feline body language". Archived from the original on 2018-06-20. Retrieved 2016-09-12. ^ An Ethogram for Behavioral Studies of the Domestic Cat. UFAW Animal Welfare Research Report No 8. UK Cat Behavior Working Group, 1995. ^ "Reading Your Cat". Animal Planet. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ Eckstein, Robert A.; Hart, Benjamin L. (2000). "Grooming and Control of Fleas in Cats". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 68 (2): 141–50. doi:10.1016/s0168-1591(00)00095-2. PMID 10771322. ^ Schwartz, Stefanie (June 2003). "Separation anxiety syndrome in dogs and cats". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 222 (11): 1526–32. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.222.1526. PMID 12784957. ^ McPherson, F.J; Chenoweth, P.J (April 2012). "Mammalian sexual dimorphism". Animal Reproduction Science. 131 (3–4): 109–122. doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.02.007. PMID 22482798. ^ Spielman, Dr. Bari. "Panting in Cats: Is It Normal?". Retrieved 2010-01-07. ^ "Cat Panting Explained". The Cat Health Guide. Retrieved 2011-07-02. ^ Adams, Cecil (1996-07-19). "Do cats always land unharmed on their feet, no matter how far they fall?". The Straight Dope. Chicago Reader. Retrieved 2007-11-07. ^ Robbie Gonzalez (22 November 2013). "The one myth about cats that's actually true". Gizmodo. Retrieved 21 May 2018. ^ Pozza, M. E.; Stella, J. L.; Chappuis-Gagnon, A. C.; Wagner, S. O.; Buffington, C. A. (2008). "Pinch-induced behavioral inhibition ('clipnosis') in domestic cats". Journal of Feline Medicine & Surgery. 10 (1): 82–7. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2007.10.008. PMID 18222719. S2CID 46156902. ^ Hart, Benjamin (December 2008). "Why do dogs and cats eat grass?". Veterinary Medicine. 103 (12): 648. ^ Li, Xia (July 2006). "Cats lack a sweet taste receptor". The Journal of Nutrition. 136 (7): 1932S–1934S. doi:10.1093/jn/136.7.1932s. PMC 2063449. PMID 16772462. ^ Macdonald, Rogers (1984). "Nutrition of the domestic cat, a mammalian carnivore". Annual Review of Nutrition. 4 (1): 521–562. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.4.1.521. PMID 6380542. ^ "What You Need To Do If Your Cat Not Eating Much But Acting Normal". Walk With Cat. 2019-09-26. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ Bradshaw, J. W. S., & Cook, S. E. (1996). Patterns of Pet Cat Behaviour at Feeding Occasions. Applied Animal Behavioral Science 47(1), 61-64. DOI: doi.org/10.1016/0168-1591(95)01011-4 ^ Izawa, Masako (1983). "Daily Activities of the Feral Cat Felis catus LINN.*". Retrieved 1 May 2023. ^ Piccione, Giuseppe; Marafioti, Simona; Giannetto, Claudia; Panzera, Michele; Fazio, Francesco (2013-07-01). "Daily rhythm of total activity pattern in domestic cats (Felis silvestris catus) maintained in two different housing conditions". Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 8 (4): 189–194. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2012.09.004. ISSN 1558-7878. ^ Frayne, Jennifer; Murray, Sarah Macdonald; Croney, Candace; Flickinger, Elizabeth; Edwards, Michelle; Shoveller, Anna Kate (2019). "The Behavioural Effects of Innovative Litter Developed to Attract Cats". Animals. 9 (9): 683. doi:10.3390/ani9090683. PMC 6770919. PMID 31540016. ^ "Socialization". Encyclopedia Britannica. October 18, 2018. ^ "Socialization". Dictionary.com. October 18, 2018. ^ a b c d Spotte, Stephen (2014). Free-Ranging Cats: Behaviour, Ecology, & Management. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. pp. 49–59. ISBN 978-1-118-88401-0. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Crowell-Davis, Sharon, L. (2007). "Cat Behaviour: Social Organization, Communication, & Development". The Welfare of Cats. Netherlands: Springer, Dordrecht. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ a b c d e f Bradshaw, John W. S. (1992). The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. Wallingford: CAB International. pp. 78, 198–200. ISBN 0-85198-715-X. ^ a b Alder, H.E. (1955). "Some Factors of Observational Learning". The Journal of Genetic Psychology. 86 (1): 159–177. doi:10.1080/00221325.1955.10532903. PMID 14354164. ProQuest 1297110751. ^ Caro, T. M. (1980). "Effects of the Mother, Object Play, and Adult Experience on Predation in Cats". Behavioral and Neural Biology. 29 (1): 29–51. doi:10.1016/S0163-1047(80)92456-5. PMID 7387584. ^ a b c d e f g h Leyhausen, Paul (1979). Cat Behaviour: The Predatory & Social Behaviour of Domestic & Wild Cats. New York, New York: Garland Publishing Inc. pp. 164–216, 227–231. ISBN 978-0-8240-7017-5. ^ a b Beadle, Muriel (1977). The Cat: History, Biology, and Behaviour. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 100–111. ISBN 978-0-671-22451-6. ^ "Bunting Behavior – Answers, Why, When & How of Cat Behavior Issues by Pam Johnson-Bennett". www.catbehaviorassociates.com. 2012-05-03. Retrieved 2018-12-03. ^ Takagi, Saho; Saito, Atsuko; Arahori, Minori; Chijiiwa, Hitomi; Koyasu, Hikari; Nagasawa, Miho; Kikusui, Takefumi; Fujita, Kazuo; Kuroshima, Hika (13 April 2022). "Cats learn the names of their friend cats in their daily lives". Scientific Reports. 12 (1): 6155. Bibcode:2022NatSR..12.6155T. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-10261-5. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 9007945. PMID 35418204. S2CID 248155872. ^ a b c Turner, Dennis C.; Bateson, Patrick (1988). The Domestic Cat: The Biology of its Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 112–113, 159–168. ISBN 978-0-521-35447-9. ^ a b c d e Bernstein, Penny L. (2007). "The Human-Cat Relationship". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 47–89. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ "Why Does My Cat Follow Me Everywhere In The House". Walk With Cat. 2019-10-03. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ a b c d Casey, Rachel; Bradshaw, John (November 2008). "The effects of additional socialisation for kittens in a rescue centre on their behaviour and suitability as a pet". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 114 (1–2): 196–205. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2008.01.003. ^ a b Heath, Sarah E. (2007). "Behaviour Problems and Welfare". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 91–107. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ Roetman, Philip; Kikillus, K. Heidy; Chiera, Belinda; Tindle, Hayley; Quinton, Gillian; Litchfield, Carla A. (2017-08-23). "The 'Feline Five': An exploration of personality in pet cats (Felis catus)". PLOS ONE. 12 (8): e0183455. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1283455L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0183455. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 5568325. PMID 28832622. ^ Herron, Meghan. "Environmental Enrichment for Indoor Cats" (PDF). Ohio State University. OSU. ^ "The Dangers of Strings, Ribbons, and Yarn for Cats". ^ "One Kitten or Two?". Archived from the original on 2018-06-21. Retrieved 2015-09-17. ^ Beaver, Bonnie (September 2004). "Fractious cats and feline aggression". Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 6 (1): 13–18. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2003.09.011. PMID 15123162. S2CID 525291. Bishko, Adriane. "What Your Cat's Body Language Is Saying". WebMD Pet. WebMD. Retrieved 1 December 2018. vteDomestic catsFelinology Anatomy Genetics Dwarf cat Kitten Odd-eyed cat Squitten Coat genetics Bicolor cat Black cat Calico cat Tabby cat Tortoiseshell cat Health Aging Declawing Diet dental health senior Vaccination Behavior Cat–dog relationship Catfight Catnip valerian Communication Meow Purr Kneading Intelligence Play and toys Righting reflex Senses Human–catinteraction Ailurophobia Cat cafés Cat killers Cat massage Cat meat Cat-scratch disease Cat show Cats in ancient Egypt Cultural depictions fictional Internet Feral cat Cats and Islam Lolcat National Cat Day Pet cat Puppy cat Working cat Bodega cat Farm cat Library cat Ship's cat Zoonosis Registries American Cat Fanciers Association Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana Canadian Cat Association Cat Aficionado Association Cat Fanciers' Association Fédération Internationale Féline Governing Council of the Cat Fancy New Zealand Cat Fancy Southern Africa Cat Council The International Cat Association World Cat Congress World Cat Federation Breeds(full list)(experimental)Fullydomestic Abyssinian American Curl American Shorthair Balinese Brazilian Shorthair British Shorthair Birman Bombay Burmese Burmilla California Spangled Chartreux Chinese Li Hua Colorpoint Shorthair Cornish Rex Cymric Devon Rex Donskoy Egyptian Mau European Shorthair Exotic Shorthair German Rex Himalayan Japanese Bobtail Javanese Khao Manee Korat Kurilian Bobtail Lykoi Maine Coon Manx Munchkin Neva Masquerade Norwegian Forest Ocicat Ojos Azules Oriental Shorthair Persian Peterbald Pixie-bob Ragdoll Ragamuffin Russian Blue Scottish Fold Selkirk Rex Siamese Siberian Singapura Snowshoe Somali Sphynx Thai Traditional Persian Tonkinese Toyger Turkish Angora Turkish Van Hybrid Bengal Chausie Highlander Savannah Serengeti Landraces Aegean Cyprus Domestic long-haired Domestic short-haired Kellas Sokoke Van Diseases anddisorders Acne Asthma Calicivirus Congenital sensorineural deafness Feline corneal sequestrum Flea Coccidia Heartworm Hepatic lipidosis Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Immunodeficiency virus Infectious peritonitis Leukemia virus Lower urinary tract disease Panleukopenia Giardiasis Polydactyly Rabies Ringworm Tritrichomonas foetus Roundworm Skin disorders Tick Toxoplasmosis Viral rhinotracheitis Cats by country Australia Canada Japan New Zealand United Kingdom United States Related List of individual cats List of oldest cats Cats in folklore Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cat_behavior&oldid=1177443160" Categories: Cat behaviorAnimal communicationEthologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from October 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from July 2012All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesCommons category link is on WikidataArticles containing video clips This page was last edited on 27 September 2023, at 16:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Communication Toggle Communication subsection 1.1Body language 1.1.1The tail 1.1.2The eyes 1.2Scent rubbing and spraying 1.3Body postures 2Grooming 3Kneading 4Panting 5Reflexes Toggle Reflexes subsection 5.1Righting reflex 5.2Freeze reflex 6Eating patterns 7Sleeping patterns 8Excretion 9Socialization Toggle Socialization subsection 9.1Colony organization 9.2Social learning 9.3Socialization between cats 9.3.1Social conflicts 9.4Socialization with humans 10Predatory behavior 11Environment 12See also 13References Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Cat behavior 3 languages ČeštinaEspañol한국어 Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Behavior of cats This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Cat behavior" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Cat behavior is a cat's behavior and responses to events and other stimuli. Cat behavior includes body language, elimination habits, aggression, play, communication, hunting, grooming, urine marking, and face rubbing. It varies among individuals, colonies, and breeds. Communication and sociability can vary greatly among individual cats. In a family with many cats, the interactions can change depending on which individuals are present and how restricted the territory and resources are. One or more individuals may become aggressive: fighting may occur with the attack, resulting in scratches and deep bite wounds. Communication[edit] Main article: Cat communication A staring cat Kittens vocalize early in development. Some examples of different vocalizations are described below.[1] Purring - means that the cat is either content or is self-soothing due to fear Meowing - a frequently used greeting. A mother meows when interacting with her young. Meows can also be used when a cat wishes for attention. [2] Hissing or spitting - indicates an angry or defensive cat. Yowling - means that the cat is in distress or feeling aggressive. Chattering - occurs when hunting or tracking potential prey. This consists of quick chirps made while the mouth vibrates. The gaze is fixed and staring. This behavior may be in response to a surge of adrenaline or may be caused by the anticipation of a pending hunt.[3] Body language[edit] Cats greeting by rubbing against each other; the upright "question mark shape" tails indicate happiness or friendship Cats rely strongly on body language to communicate. A cat may rub against an object or lick a person. Much of a cat's body language is through its tail, ears, head position, and back posture. The tail[edit] Observing how a cat holds its tail can give a good sense of the cat’s current temperament. Held high, may have a slight curl forward - a sign of friendliness. The cat is happy, content, and comfortable. The tail may quiver or vibrate if the cat is excited. Held low and tucked under - a sign of fear or unease. The cat is attempting to make itself a smaller target to potential threats. Flicking, twitching - a sign of agitation. The cat is on high alert or is upset, and is not receptive to interaction. Cats may also flick their tails in an oscillating, snake-like motion, or abruptly from side to side, often just before pouncing on an object or animal. [4] The eyes[edit] When cats greet another cat in their vicinity, they can do a slow, languid, long blink to communicate affection if they trust the person or animal they are in contact with. One way to communicate love and trust to a cat is to say its name, get its attention, look it in the eyes and then slowly blink at it to emulate trust and love. They may return the gesture.[5] In a study of 18 cats, the cat behavior of several half-blinks followed by a prolonged eye narrowing or eye closure was found to be a positive emotional response. When a familiar human slow-blinks towards a cat, the cat tends to approach the human more frequently than if the human has a neutral expression that avoids eye contact. This behavior may share features with the "genuine" human smile that involves the corners of the eyes narrowing.[6] Scent rubbing and spraying[edit] These behaviors are thought to be a way of marking territory. Facial marking behavior is used to mark their territory as "safe". The cat rubs its cheeks on prominent objects in the preferred territory, depositing a chemical pheromone, known as a contentment pheromone. Synthetic versions of the feline facial pheromone are available commercially.[7][8] Cats have anal sacs or scent glands. Scent is deposited on the feces as it is eliminated. Unlike intact male cats, female and neutered male cats usually do not spray urine. Spraying is accomplished by backing up against a vertical surface and spraying a jet of urine on that surface. Unlike a dog's penis, a cat's penis points backward. Males neutered in adulthood may still spray after neutering. Urinating on horizontal surfaces in the home outside the litter box may indicate dissatisfaction with the box, due to a variety of factors such as substrate texture, cleanliness and privacy. It can also be a sign of urinary tract problems. Male cats on poor diets are susceptible to crystal formation in the urine, which can block the urethra and create a medical emergency. Body postures[edit] A cat's posture communicates its emotions. It is best to observe cats' natural behavior when they are by themselves, with humans, and with other animals.[9] Their postures can be friendly or aggressive, depending on the situation. Some of the most basic and familiar cat postures include:[10][11] Relaxed posture – The cat is seen lying on the side or sitting. Its breathing is slow to normal, with legs bent, or hind legs laid out or extended. The tail is loosely wrapped, extended, or held up. It also hangs down loosely when the cat is standing. Stretching posture – another posture indicating the cat is relaxed.Cat yawning postureYawning posture – either by itself or in conjunction with a stretch: another posture of a relaxed cat. Alert posture – The cat is lying on its belly, or it may be sitting. Its back is almost horizontal when standing and moving. Its breathing is normal, with its legs bent or extended (when standing). Its tail is curved back or straight upward, and there may be twitching while the tail is positioned downward. Tense posture – The cat is lying on its belly, with the back of its body lower than its upper body (slinking) when standing or moving back. Its legs, including the hind legs, are bent, and its front legs are extended when standing. Its tail is close to the body, tensed or curled downward. There can be twitching when the cat is standing up. Anxious/ovulating posture – The cat is lying on its belly. The back of the body is visibly lower than the front part when the cat is standing or moving. Its breathing may be fast, and its legs are tucked under its body. The tail is close to the body and may be curled forward (or close to the body when standing), with the tip of the tail moving up and down or side to side. Fearful posture – The cat is lying on its belly or crouching directly on top of its paws. Its entire body may be shaking and very near the ground when standing up. Breathing is fast, with the cat's legs bent near the surface, and its tail is curled and very close to its body when standing on all fours. Confident posture – The cat may walk around in a more comfortable manner with its tail up to the sky, indicating its importance. Cats often walk through houses with their tail standing up high above them, making them look grander and more elegant. Terrified posture – The cat is crouched directly on top of its paws, with visible shaking seen in some parts of the body. Its tail is close to the body, and can be standing up, together with its hair on the back. The legs are very stiff or even bent to increase their size. Typically, cats avoid contact when they feel threatened, although they can resort to varying degrees of aggression when they feel cornered, or when escape is impossible.[12] Relaxing cat Stretching cat Yawning cat Yawning kitten Alert cat Tense cat Fearful cat Terrified cat Grooming[edit] Cat grooming itself Oral grooming for domestic and feral cats is a common behavior; recent studies on domestic cats show that they spend about 8% of resting time grooming themselves. Grooming is extremely important not only to clean themselves but also to ensure ectoparasite control. Fleas tend to be the most common ectoparasite of cats, and some studies allude to indirect evidence that grooming in cats is effective in removing fleas. Cats not only use their tongue for grooming to control ectoparasites, and scratch grooming may also aid in dislodging fleas from the head and neck.[13] Kneading[edit] Main article: Kneading (cats) Classic kneading of a cat Kittens "knead" the breast while suckling, using the forelimbs one at a time in an alternating pattern to push against the mammary glands to stimulate lactation in the mother. Cats carry these infantile behaviors beyond nursing and into adulthood. Some cats "nurse," i.e. suck, on clothing or bedding during kneading. The cat exerts firm downward pressure with its paw, opening its toes to expose its claws, then closes its claws as it lifts its paw. The process takes place with alternate paws at intervals of one to two seconds. The cat may knead while sitting on its owner's lap, which may prove painful if the cat has sharp claws. Because most of the preferred "domestic traits" are neotenous, or juvenile traits that persist in the adult, kneading may be a relic juvenile behavior retained in adult domestic cats.[14] It may also stimulate the cat and make it feel good, in the same manner as a human stretching. Kneading is often a precursor to sleeping. Many cats purr while kneading. They also purr mostly when newborn, when feeding, or when trying to feed on their mother's teat. The common association between the two behaviors may corroborate the evidence in favor of the origin of kneading as a remnant instinct.[15] Panting[edit] A cat panting Unlike dogs, panting is a rare occurrence in cats, except in warm weather environments. Cats may pant in response to anxiety, fear or excitement. Panting can also be caused by play, exercise, or stress from things like car rides. However, if panting is excessive or the cat appears in distress, it may be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as a nasal blockage, heartworm disease, head trauma, or drug poisoning.[16] In many cases, feline panting, especially if accompanied by other symptoms, such as coughing or shallow breathing (dyspnea), is considered to be abnormal, and should be treated as a medical emergency.[17] Reflexes[edit] Righting reflex[edit] Main article: Cat righting reflex Chronophotography of a falling cat by Étienne-Jules Marey, 1894 The righting reflex is the attempt of cats to land on their feet at the completion of a jump or a fall. They can do this more easily than other animals due to their flexible spine, floating collarbone, and loose skin. Cats also use vision and their vestibular apparatus to help tell which way to turn. They can then stretch themselves out and relax their muscles. The righting reflex does not always result in the cat landing on its feet.[18] Freeze reflex[edit] Adult cats are able to make use of pinch-induced behavioural inhibition to induce a "freeze reflex" in their young, which enables them to be transported by the neck without resisting. This reflex, also known as clipnosis,[19][20] can also be exhibited by adults. Eating patterns[edit] Cat eating "cat grass" Calico cat drinking water from a glass. Cats are obligate carnivores and do not do well on herbivore diets. In the wild they usually hunt smaller mammals to keep themselves nourished. Many cats find and chew small quantities of long grass, but this is not for its nutritional value per se. The eating of grass seems to stem from feline ancestry and has nothing to do with dietary requirements. It is believed that feline ancestors instead ate grass to purge intestinal parasites.[21] Cats have no sweet taste receptors on their tongue and thus cannot taste sweet things at all. Cats mainly smell for their food, and what they taste for is amino acids instead. This may be a cause of cats being diagnosed with diabetes. The food that domestic cats get has a lot of carbohydrates in it, and a high sugar content cannot be efficiently processed by the digestive system of cats.[22] Cats drink water by lapping the surface with their tongue. A fraction of a teaspoon of water is taken up with each lap. Although some desert cats are able to obtain much of their water needs through the flesh of their prey, most cats come to bodies of water to drink.[23] Eating patterns are another indicator to understand behavior changes in domestic cats. Changes in typical eating patterns can be an early signal for possible physical or psychological health problems. [24] A cat's eating pattern in a domestic setting is essential for the cat and owner bond to form. This happens because cats form attachments to households that regularly feed them.[25] Some cats ask for food dozens of times a day, including at night, with rubbing, pacing, meowing, or sometimes loud purring. Sleeping patterns[edit] More than half of cats sleep between 12 and 18 hours a day, sometimes even more. Most cats sleep more as they age. [26] This can explain why cats are crepuscular, mostly being active during the night.[27] Excretion[edit] Cats tend to bury their feces after defecating and can be attracted to a litter box if it has attractant in it. Cats will also generally defecate more in those litter boxes.[28] Socialization[edit] Socialization is defined as a member of a specific group learning to be part of that group.[29] It is said to be a continuous learning process that allows an individual to learn the necessary skills and behaviors required for a particular social position.[30] Cats, domestic or wild, do participate in social behaviors, even though it is thought that most cat species (besides lions) are solitary, anti-social animals.[31] Under certain circumstances, such as food availability, shelter, or protection, cats can be seen in groups.[31] The social behaviors that cats participate in are colony organization, social learning, socialization between cats, and socialization with humans. Colony organization[edit] Free-living domestic cats tend to form colonies.[32] Small colonies consist of one female, known as a queen, and her kittens. Large colonies consist of several queens and their kittens.[32] Male cats are present in both types of colonies and serve the purpose of reproduction and defending territory. Within these colonies altruistic behavior occurs. This means that if an expecting queen helps another queen that just gave birth, then the helping queen will get help in return when she gives birth.[32] Although free living cats are found in colonies, stable social order, like that of the lion, does not exist.[31] Free living cats usually are found in colonies for protection against predators, and for food availability.[31] Although there are many advantages of group living, such as easy access to mates, and defensive measures to protect food, there are also disadvantages, such as sexual competition for mates. If the group gets too big, fights may break out over food.[32] Social learning[edit] Cats are observational learners.[32][33] This type of learning emerges early in a cat's life,[34] and has been shown in many laboratory studies. Young kittens learn to hunt from their mothers by observing their techniques when catching prey.[32] The mother ensures that her kittens learn hunting techniques by first bringing dead prey to the litter, then live prey. She demonstrates the techniques required for successful capture to her kittens by bringing live prey to the litter for the kittens to catch themselves.[32] Prey-catching behavior of kittens improves over time when mothers are present .[35] Observational learning for cats can be described in terms of the drive to complete the behavior, the cue that initiates the behavior, the response to the cue, and the reward for completing the behavior.[34] This is shown when cats learn predatory behavior from their mothers. The drive is hunger, the cue is the prey, the response is to catch the prey, and the reward is to relieve the hunger sensation. Kittens also show observational learning when they are socializing with humans. They are more likely to initiate socialization with humans when their mothers are exhibiting non-aggressive and non-defensive behaviors.[32] Even though mothers spend most time with their kittens, male cats play an important role by breaking up fights among litter mates.[32] Observational learning is not limited to kittens. It can also be observed during adulthood. Studies have been done with adult cats performing a task, such as pressing a lever after a visual cue.[33] Adult cats that see others performing a task learn to perform the same task faster than those who did not witness another cat performing it.[33] Socialization between cats[edit] When strange cats meet, they ideally cautiously allow each other to smell their hindquarters, but this does not happen very often.[36] Usually when strange cats meet, one cat makes a sudden movement that puts the other cat into a defensive mode. The subordinate cat will then draw in on itself and prepare to attack if needed.[36] If an attack happens, the subordinate cat will usually run away, but this does not happen all the time and it could lead to a tomcat duel.[36] Dominance is also seen as an underlying factor for how conspecifics -- members of the same species -- interact with each other. Dominance can be seen among cats in multi-cat households. It can be seen when other cats submit to the dominant cat. Dominance includes such behaviors as the subordinate cat walking around the dominant cat, waiting for the dominant cat to walk past, avoiding eye contact, crouching, lying on its side (defensive posture), and retreating when the dominant cat approaches.[32] The dominant cat presents a specific body posture as well. Its ears are straight up, the base of its tail is arched, and it looks directly at the subordinate cat.[32] Dominant cats are usually not aggressive, but if a subordinate cat blocks food they may become aggressive.[37] When this aggressive behavior occurs, it can also lead to the dominant cat preventing subordinate cats from eating and using the litter box.[32] This can cause the subordinate cat to defecate somewhere else and create problems with human interaction.[32] Social conflicts[edit] Two cats fighting Social conflicts among cats depend solely on the behavior of the cats. Some research has shown that cats rarely pick fights, but when they do, it's usually for protecting food and/or litters, and defending territory.[37] The first sign of an imminent tomcat duel is when both cats draw themselves up high on their legs, all hair along the middle of their backs stands straight up, and they mew and howl loudly as they approach each other.[36] The steps the cats make become slower and shorter the closer they get to each other. Once they are close enough to attack, they pause slightly, and then one cat leaps and tries to bite the nape of the other cat.[36] The other cat has no choice but to retaliate, and both cats roll aggressively on the ground, with loud and intense screams by both.[36] After some time the cats separate and stand face to face to begin the attack all over again. This can go on for some time until one cat does not get up again and remains seated.[36] The defeated cat does not move until the victor has completed a sniff of the area and moves outside the fighting area. Once this happens, the defeated cat leaves the area, ending the duel.[36] Females may also fight with each other, and male-female fights can occur as well. Cats may need to be reintroduced or separated to avoid fights in a closed household. Socialization with humans[edit] Cats have learned how to develop their vocals in order to converse with humans, trying to tell humans what they want. One way cats and humans interact is through "head bunting," in which a cat rubs its head on a human in order to leave its scent to claim territory and create a bond.[38] Cats can sometimes take cues from human pointing and from the direction of human gazes. They can sometimes discriminate between, and sometimes even correlate, human facial expressions, attentional states, and voices. Besides its own name, a cat can sometimes learn the names of humans and other cats.[39] Cats age three to nine weeks are sensitive to human socialization;[40] after this period socialization can be less effective.[41] Studies have shown that the earlier a kitten is handled, the less fearful it will be toward humans.[41] Other factors that can enhance socialization are having many people handle the kitten frequently, the presence of the mother, and feeding.[40][41] The presence of the mother is important because cats are observational learners. If the mother is comfortable around humans, it can reduce anxiety in the kitten and promote the kitten-human relationship.[40][42] Feral kittens around two to seven weeks old can be socialized, usually within a month of capture.[43] Some species of cats cannot be socialized toward humans because of factors such as genetic influence and in some cases specific learning experiences.[43] The best way to get a kitten to socialize is to handle it for many hours a week.[43] The process is made easier if there is another socialized cat present but not necessarily in the same space as the feral cat. If the handler can get a cat to urinate in the litter tray, then the others in a litter will usually follow. Initial contact with thick gloves is highly recommended until trust is established, usually within the first week. Socializing an adult is challenging. Socialized adult feral cats tend to trust only those they trusted in their socialization period, and can be very fearful around strangers.[43] Cats can be companion animals. Studies have shown that these cats provide many physiological and psychological benefits for the owner.[41] Other aspects of cat behavior that are deemed advantageous for the human-cat bond are cat hygiene (cats are known for good hygiene)[44] and they do not have to be taken outside (use of the litter box). Cats are perfect for smaller spaces, and they have no problems with being left alone for extended periods.[41] Even though there are a number of benefits of owning a cat, there are a number of problematic behaviors that can affect the human-cat relationship. One behavior is when cats attack people by clawing and biting.[33] This often occurs spontaneously or is triggered by sudden movements.[33] Another problematic behavior is the "petting and biting syndrome," which involves the cat being petted and then suddenly attacking and running away.[33] Other problems are house soiling, scratching furniture, and when a cat brings dead prey into the house.[44] There are 52 measured personality traits in cats, with one study saying "five reliable personality factors were found using principal axis factor analysis: neuroticism, extroversion, dominance, impulsiveness and agreeableness."[45] Predatory behavior[edit] A domestic cat with its prey, a deer mouse Cats are natural predators. When allowed to roam outdoors, many cats will engage in predation on wildlife. Understanding an indoor cat's personality can go a long way toward satisfying their instincts and avoid potentially inconvenient behavior (such as sudden hissing, dashing around the house, or climbing the curtains). Environmental enrichment items include:[46] A good-sized cat tree, with scratching posts Toys that provide a release for their predatory instincts[47] A well kept litter box or toilet Fresh water and dry cat food Social interaction Environment[edit] Cats like to organize their environment based on their needs. Like their ancestors, domestic cats still have an inherent desire to maintain an independent territory but are generally content to live with other cats for company as they easily get bored. Living alone for a longer time may cause them to forget how to communicate with other cats.[48] Sometimes adding a kitten to a household can be a bad idea. If there already is an older cat present and another cat is added, it may be better to get another older cat that has been socialized with other cats. When a kitten is introduced to a mature cat, that cat may show feline asocial aggression, in which they feel threatened and act aggressive to drive off the intruder. If this happens, the kitten and the cat should be separated and slowly introduced by rubbing towels on the animals and presenting the towel to the other.[49] Cats use scent and pheromones to help organize their territory by marking prominent objects. If these objects or scents are removed, it upsets the cat's perception of its environment. See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cat behavior. Cat behaviorist Cat communication Cat play and toys Ethology Cat training References[edit] ^ Shipley, C; Buchwald, J.S; Carterette, E.C (January 1988). "The role of auditory feedback in the vocalizations of cats". Experimental Brain Research. 69 (2): 431–438. doi:10.1007/bf00247589. PMID 3345817. S2CID 31184802. ^ "Cats." Gale In Context Online Collection, Gale, 2018. Gale In Context: College, link.gale.com/apps/doc/LQLWOQ026686444/GPS?u=brookdalecc&sid=bookmark-GPS&xid=7afb5516. Accessed 10 Apr. 2023. ^ Kelley, JaneA (2017-06-05). "Scientists Discover New Meaning for Cat Chattering". Catster. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ "The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language". Tuft + Paw. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ Pachel, Christopher (May 2014). "Intercat Aggression: Restoring Harmony in the Home: A Guide for Practitioners". The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice. 44 (3): 565–579. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2014.01.007. PMID 24766700. ^ Humphrey, Tasmin; Proops, Leanne; Forman, Jemma; Spooner, Rebecca; McComb, Karen (2020-10-05). "The role of cat eye narrowing movements in cat–human communication". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 16503. Bibcode:2020NatSR..1016503H. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-73426-0. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 7536207. PMID 33020542. ^ Dr. Jennifer Coates, DVM (22 April 2013). "Synthetic Feline Facial Pheromones: Making Recommendations in the Absence of Definitive Data, Part 1". petMD. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2014. ^ "Feliway". Archived from the original on 2015-05-02. Retrieved 2015-02-03. ^ "The Indoor Cat Initiative" (PDF). The Ohio State University, College of Veterinary Medicine. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-18. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ "Test to determine how well you know feline body language". Archived from the original on 2018-06-20. Retrieved 2016-09-12. ^ An Ethogram for Behavioral Studies of the Domestic Cat. UFAW Animal Welfare Research Report No 8. UK Cat Behavior Working Group, 1995. ^ "Reading Your Cat". Animal Planet. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ Eckstein, Robert A.; Hart, Benjamin L. (2000). "Grooming and Control of Fleas in Cats". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 68 (2): 141–50. doi:10.1016/s0168-1591(00)00095-2. PMID 10771322. ^ Schwartz, Stefanie (June 2003). "Separation anxiety syndrome in dogs and cats". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 222 (11): 1526–32. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.222.1526. PMID 12784957. ^ McPherson, F.J; Chenoweth, P.J (April 2012). "Mammalian sexual dimorphism". Animal Reproduction Science. 131 (3–4): 109–122. doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.02.007. PMID 22482798. ^ Spielman, Dr. Bari. "Panting in Cats: Is It Normal?". Retrieved 2010-01-07. ^ "Cat Panting Explained". The Cat Health Guide. Retrieved 2011-07-02. ^ Adams, Cecil (1996-07-19). "Do cats always land unharmed on their feet, no matter how far they fall?". The Straight Dope. Chicago Reader. Retrieved 2007-11-07. ^ Robbie Gonzalez (22 November 2013). "The one myth about cats that's actually true". Gizmodo. Retrieved 21 May 2018. ^ Pozza, M. E.; Stella, J. L.; Chappuis-Gagnon, A. C.; Wagner, S. O.; Buffington, C. A. (2008). "Pinch-induced behavioral inhibition ('clipnosis') in domestic cats". Journal of Feline Medicine & Surgery. 10 (1): 82–7. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2007.10.008. PMID 18222719. S2CID 46156902. ^ Hart, Benjamin (December 2008). "Why do dogs and cats eat grass?". Veterinary Medicine. 103 (12): 648. ^ Li, Xia (July 2006). "Cats lack a sweet taste receptor". The Journal of Nutrition. 136 (7): 1932S–1934S. doi:10.1093/jn/136.7.1932s. PMC 2063449. PMID 16772462. ^ Macdonald, Rogers (1984). "Nutrition of the domestic cat, a mammalian carnivore". Annual Review of Nutrition. 4 (1): 521–562. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.4.1.521. PMID 6380542. ^ "What You Need To Do If Your Cat Not Eating Much But Acting Normal". Walk With Cat. 2019-09-26. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ Bradshaw, J. W. S., & Cook, S. E. (1996). Patterns of Pet Cat Behaviour at Feeding Occasions. Applied Animal Behavioral Science 47(1), 61-64. DOI: doi.org/10.1016/0168-1591(95)01011-4 ^ Izawa, Masako (1983). "Daily Activities of the Feral Cat Felis catus LINN.*". Retrieved 1 May 2023. ^ Piccione, Giuseppe; Marafioti, Simona; Giannetto, Claudia; Panzera, Michele; Fazio, Francesco (2013-07-01). "Daily rhythm of total activity pattern in domestic cats (Felis silvestris catus) maintained in two different housing conditions". Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 8 (4): 189–194. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2012.09.004. ISSN 1558-7878. ^ Frayne, Jennifer; Murray, Sarah Macdonald; Croney, Candace; Flickinger, Elizabeth; Edwards, Michelle; Shoveller, Anna Kate (2019). "The Behavioural Effects of Innovative Litter Developed to Attract Cats". Animals. 9 (9): 683. doi:10.3390/ani9090683. PMC 6770919. PMID 31540016. ^ "Socialization". Encyclopedia Britannica. October 18, 2018. ^ "Socialization". Dictionary.com. October 18, 2018. ^ a b c d Spotte, Stephen (2014). Free-Ranging Cats: Behaviour, Ecology, & Management. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. pp. 49–59. ISBN 978-1-118-88401-0. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Crowell-Davis, Sharon, L. (2007). "Cat Behaviour: Social Organization, Communication, & Development". The Welfare of Cats. Netherlands: Springer, Dordrecht. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ a b c d e f Bradshaw, John W. S. (1992). The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. Wallingford: CAB International. pp. 78, 198–200. ISBN 0-85198-715-X. ^ a b Alder, H.E. (1955). "Some Factors of Observational Learning". The Journal of Genetic Psychology. 86 (1): 159–177. doi:10.1080/00221325.1955.10532903. PMID 14354164. ProQuest 1297110751. ^ Caro, T. M. (1980). "Effects of the Mother, Object Play, and Adult Experience on Predation in Cats". Behavioral and Neural Biology. 29 (1): 29–51. doi:10.1016/S0163-1047(80)92456-5. PMID 7387584. ^ a b c d e f g h Leyhausen, Paul (1979). Cat Behaviour: The Predatory & Social Behaviour of Domestic & Wild Cats. New York, New York: Garland Publishing Inc. pp. 164–216, 227–231. ISBN 978-0-8240-7017-5. ^ a b Beadle, Muriel (1977). The Cat: History, Biology, and Behaviour. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 100–111. ISBN 978-0-671-22451-6. ^ "Bunting Behavior – Answers, Why, When & How of Cat Behavior Issues by Pam Johnson-Bennett". www.catbehaviorassociates.com. 2012-05-03. Retrieved 2018-12-03. ^ Takagi, Saho; Saito, Atsuko; Arahori, Minori; Chijiiwa, Hitomi; Koyasu, Hikari; Nagasawa, Miho; Kikusui, Takefumi; Fujita, Kazuo; Kuroshima, Hika (13 April 2022). "Cats learn the names of their friend cats in their daily lives". Scientific Reports. 12 (1): 6155. Bibcode:2022NatSR..12.6155T. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-10261-5. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 9007945. PMID 35418204. S2CID 248155872. ^ a b c Turner, Dennis C.; Bateson, Patrick (1988). The Domestic Cat: The Biology of its Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 112–113, 159–168. ISBN 978-0-521-35447-9. ^ a b c d e Bernstein, Penny L. (2007). "The Human-Cat Relationship". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 47–89. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ "Why Does My Cat Follow Me Everywhere In The House". Walk With Cat. 2019-10-03. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ a b c d Casey, Rachel; Bradshaw, John (November 2008). "The effects of additional socialisation for kittens in a rescue centre on their behaviour and suitability as a pet". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 114 (1–2): 196–205. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2008.01.003. ^ a b Heath, Sarah E. (2007). "Behaviour Problems and Welfare". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 91–107. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ Roetman, Philip; Kikillus, K. Heidy; Chiera, Belinda; Tindle, Hayley; Quinton, Gillian; Litchfield, Carla A. (2017-08-23). "The 'Feline Five': An exploration of personality in pet cats (Felis catus)". PLOS ONE. 12 (8): e0183455. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1283455L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0183455. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 5568325. PMID 28832622. ^ Herron, Meghan. "Environmental Enrichment for Indoor Cats" (PDF). Ohio State University. OSU. ^ "The Dangers of Strings, Ribbons, and Yarn for Cats". ^ "One Kitten or Two?". Archived from the original on 2018-06-21. Retrieved 2015-09-17. ^ Beaver, Bonnie (September 2004). "Fractious cats and feline aggression". Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 6 (1): 13–18. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2003.09.011. PMID 15123162. S2CID 525291. Bishko, Adriane. "What Your Cat's Body Language Is Saying". WebMD Pet. WebMD. Retrieved 1 December 2018. vteDomestic catsFelinology Anatomy Genetics Dwarf cat Kitten Odd-eyed cat Squitten Coat genetics Bicolor cat Black cat Calico cat Tabby cat Tortoiseshell cat Health Aging Declawing Diet dental health senior Vaccination Behavior Cat–dog relationship Catfight Catnip valerian Communication Meow Purr Kneading Intelligence Play and toys Righting reflex Senses Human–catinteraction Ailurophobia Cat cafés Cat killers Cat massage Cat meat Cat-scratch disease Cat show Cats in ancient Egypt Cultural depictions fictional Internet Feral cat Cats and Islam Lolcat National Cat Day Pet cat Puppy cat Working cat Bodega cat Farm cat Library cat Ship's cat Zoonosis Registries American Cat Fanciers Association Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana Canadian Cat Association Cat Aficionado Association Cat Fanciers' Association Fédération Internationale Féline Governing Council of the Cat Fancy New Zealand Cat Fancy Southern Africa Cat Council The International Cat Association World Cat Congress World Cat Federation Breeds(full list)(experimental)Fullydomestic Abyssinian American Curl American Shorthair Balinese Brazilian Shorthair British Shorthair Birman Bombay Burmese Burmilla California Spangled Chartreux Chinese Li Hua Colorpoint Shorthair Cornish Rex Cymric Devon Rex Donskoy Egyptian Mau European Shorthair Exotic Shorthair German Rex Himalayan Japanese Bobtail Javanese Khao Manee Korat Kurilian Bobtail Lykoi Maine Coon Manx Munchkin Neva Masquerade Norwegian Forest Ocicat Ojos Azules Oriental Shorthair Persian Peterbald Pixie-bob Ragdoll Ragamuffin Russian Blue Scottish Fold Selkirk Rex Siamese Siberian Singapura Snowshoe Somali Sphynx Thai Traditional Persian Tonkinese Toyger Turkish Angora Turkish Van Hybrid Bengal Chausie Highlander Savannah Serengeti Landraces Aegean Cyprus Domestic long-haired Domestic short-haired Kellas Sokoke Van Diseases anddisorders Acne Asthma Calicivirus Congenital sensorineural deafness Feline corneal sequestrum Flea Coccidia Heartworm Hepatic lipidosis Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Immunodeficiency virus Infectious peritonitis Leukemia virus Lower urinary tract disease Panleukopenia Giardiasis Polydactyly Rabies Ringworm Tritrichomonas foetus Roundworm Skin disorders Tick Toxoplasmosis Viral rhinotracheitis Cats by country Australia Canada Japan New Zealand United Kingdom United States Related List of individual cats List of oldest cats Cats in folklore Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cat_behavior&oldid=1177443160" Categories: Cat behaviorAnimal communicationEthologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from October 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from July 2012All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesCommons category link is on WikidataArticles containing video clips This page was last edited on 27 September 2023, at 16:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Communication Toggle Communication subsection 1.1Body language 1.1.1The tail 1.1.2The eyes 1.2Scent rubbing and spraying 1.3Body postures 2Grooming 3Kneading 4Panting 5Reflexes Toggle Reflexes subsection 5.1Righting reflex 5.2Freeze reflex 6Eating patterns 7Sleeping patterns 8Excretion 9Socialization Toggle Socialization subsection 9.1Colony organization 9.2Social learning 9.3Socialization between cats 9.3.1Social conflicts 9.4Socialization with humans 10Predatory behavior 11Environment 12See also 13References Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Cat behavior 3 languages ČeštinaEspañol한국어 Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Behavior of cats This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Cat behavior" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Cat behavior is a cat's behavior and responses to events and other stimuli. Cat behavior includes body language, elimination habits, aggression, play, communication, hunting, grooming, urine marking, and face rubbing. It varies among individuals, colonies, and breeds. Communication and sociability can vary greatly among individual cats. In a family with many cats, the interactions can change depending on which individuals are present and how restricted the territory and resources are. One or more individuals may become aggressive: fighting may occur with the attack, resulting in scratches and deep bite wounds. Communication[edit] Main article: Cat communication A staring cat Kittens vocalize early in development. Some examples of different vocalizations are described below.[1] Purring - means that the cat is either content or is self-soothing due to fear Meowing - a frequently used greeting. A mother meows when interacting with her young. Meows can also be used when a cat wishes for attention. [2] Hissing or spitting - indicates an angry or defensive cat. Yowling - means that the cat is in distress or feeling aggressive. Chattering - occurs when hunting or tracking potential prey. This consists of quick chirps made while the mouth vibrates. The gaze is fixed and staring. This behavior may be in response to a surge of adrenaline or may be caused by the anticipation of a pending hunt.[3] Body language[edit] Cats greeting by rubbing against each other; the upright "question mark shape" tails indicate happiness or friendship Cats rely strongly on body language to communicate. A cat may rub against an object or lick a person. Much of a cat's body language is through its tail, ears, head position, and back posture. The tail[edit] Observing how a cat holds its tail can give a good sense of the cat’s current temperament. Held high, may have a slight curl forward - a sign of friendliness. The cat is happy, content, and comfortable. The tail may quiver or vibrate if the cat is excited. Held low and tucked under - a sign of fear or unease. The cat is attempting to make itself a smaller target to potential threats. Flicking, twitching - a sign of agitation. The cat is on high alert or is upset, and is not receptive to interaction. Cats may also flick their tails in an oscillating, snake-like motion, or abruptly from side to side, often just before pouncing on an object or animal. [4] The eyes[edit] When cats greet another cat in their vicinity, they can do a slow, languid, long blink to communicate affection if they trust the person or animal they are in contact with. One way to communicate love and trust to a cat is to say its name, get its attention, look it in the eyes and then slowly blink at it to emulate trust and love. They may return the gesture.[5] In a study of 18 cats, the cat behavior of several half-blinks followed by a prolonged eye narrowing or eye closure was found to be a positive emotional response. When a familiar human slow-blinks towards a cat, the cat tends to approach the human more frequently than if the human has a neutral expression that avoids eye contact. This behavior may share features with the "genuine" human smile that involves the corners of the eyes narrowing.[6] Scent rubbing and spraying[edit] These behaviors are thought to be a way of marking territory. Facial marking behavior is used to mark their territory as "safe". The cat rubs its cheeks on prominent objects in the preferred territory, depositing a chemical pheromone, known as a contentment pheromone. Synthetic versions of the feline facial pheromone are available commercially.[7][8] Cats have anal sacs or scent glands. Scent is deposited on the feces as it is eliminated. Unlike intact male cats, female and neutered male cats usually do not spray urine. Spraying is accomplished by backing up against a vertical surface and spraying a jet of urine on that surface. Unlike a dog's penis, a cat's penis points backward. Males neutered in adulthood may still spray after neutering. Urinating on horizontal surfaces in the home outside the litter box may indicate dissatisfaction with the box, due to a variety of factors such as substrate texture, cleanliness and privacy. It can also be a sign of urinary tract problems. Male cats on poor diets are susceptible to crystal formation in the urine, which can block the urethra and create a medical emergency. Body postures[edit] A cat's posture communicates its emotions. It is best to observe cats' natural behavior when they are by themselves, with humans, and with other animals.[9] Their postures can be friendly or aggressive, depending on the situation. Some of the most basic and familiar cat postures include:[10][11] Relaxed posture – The cat is seen lying on the side or sitting. Its breathing is slow to normal, with legs bent, or hind legs laid out or extended. The tail is loosely wrapped, extended, or held up. It also hangs down loosely when the cat is standing. Stretching posture – another posture indicating the cat is relaxed.Cat yawning postureYawning posture – either by itself or in conjunction with a stretch: another posture of a relaxed cat. Alert posture – The cat is lying on its belly, or it may be sitting. Its back is almost horizontal when standing and moving. Its breathing is normal, with its legs bent or extended (when standing). Its tail is curved back or straight upward, and there may be twitching while the tail is positioned downward. Tense posture – The cat is lying on its belly, with the back of its body lower than its upper body (slinking) when standing or moving back. Its legs, including the hind legs, are bent, and its front legs are extended when standing. Its tail is close to the body, tensed or curled downward. There can be twitching when the cat is standing up. Anxious/ovulating posture – The cat is lying on its belly. The back of the body is visibly lower than the front part when the cat is standing or moving. Its breathing may be fast, and its legs are tucked under its body. The tail is close to the body and may be curled forward (or close to the body when standing), with the tip of the tail moving up and down or side to side. Fearful posture – The cat is lying on its belly or crouching directly on top of its paws. Its entire body may be shaking and very near the ground when standing up. Breathing is fast, with the cat's legs bent near the surface, and its tail is curled and very close to its body when standing on all fours. Confident posture – The cat may walk around in a more comfortable manner with its tail up to the sky, indicating its importance. Cats often walk through houses with their tail standing up high above them, making them look grander and more elegant. Terrified posture – The cat is crouched directly on top of its paws, with visible shaking seen in some parts of the body. Its tail is close to the body, and can be standing up, together with its hair on the back. The legs are very stiff or even bent to increase their size. Typically, cats avoid contact when they feel threatened, although they can resort to varying degrees of aggression when they feel cornered, or when escape is impossible.[12] Relaxing cat Stretching cat Yawning cat Yawning kitten Alert cat Tense cat Fearful cat Terrified cat Grooming[edit] Cat grooming itself Oral grooming for domestic and feral cats is a common behavior; recent studies on domestic cats show that they spend about 8% of resting time grooming themselves. Grooming is extremely important not only to clean themselves but also to ensure ectoparasite control. Fleas tend to be the most common ectoparasite of cats, and some studies allude to indirect evidence that grooming in cats is effective in removing fleas. Cats not only use their tongue for grooming to control ectoparasites, and scratch grooming may also aid in dislodging fleas from the head and neck.[13] Kneading[edit] Main article: Kneading (cats) Classic kneading of a cat Kittens "knead" the breast while suckling, using the forelimbs one at a time in an alternating pattern to push against the mammary glands to stimulate lactation in the mother. Cats carry these infantile behaviors beyond nursing and into adulthood. Some cats "nurse," i.e. suck, on clothing or bedding during kneading. The cat exerts firm downward pressure with its paw, opening its toes to expose its claws, then closes its claws as it lifts its paw. The process takes place with alternate paws at intervals of one to two seconds. The cat may knead while sitting on its owner's lap, which may prove painful if the cat has sharp claws. Because most of the preferred "domestic traits" are neotenous, or juvenile traits that persist in the adult, kneading may be a relic juvenile behavior retained in adult domestic cats.[14] It may also stimulate the cat and make it feel good, in the same manner as a human stretching. Kneading is often a precursor to sleeping. Many cats purr while kneading. They also purr mostly when newborn, when feeding, or when trying to feed on their mother's teat. The common association between the two behaviors may corroborate the evidence in favor of the origin of kneading as a remnant instinct.[15] Panting[edit] A cat panting Unlike dogs, panting is a rare occurrence in cats, except in warm weather environments. Cats may pant in response to anxiety, fear or excitement. Panting can also be caused by play, exercise, or stress from things like car rides. However, if panting is excessive or the cat appears in distress, it may be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as a nasal blockage, heartworm disease, head trauma, or drug poisoning.[16] In many cases, feline panting, especially if accompanied by other symptoms, such as coughing or shallow breathing (dyspnea), is considered to be abnormal, and should be treated as a medical emergency.[17] Reflexes[edit] Righting reflex[edit] Main article: Cat righting reflex Chronophotography of a falling cat by Étienne-Jules Marey, 1894 The righting reflex is the attempt of cats to land on their feet at the completion of a jump or a fall. They can do this more easily than other animals due to their flexible spine, floating collarbone, and loose skin. Cats also use vision and their vestibular apparatus to help tell which way to turn. They can then stretch themselves out and relax their muscles. The righting reflex does not always result in the cat landing on its feet.[18] Freeze reflex[edit] Adult cats are able to make use of pinch-induced behavioural inhibition to induce a "freeze reflex" in their young, which enables them to be transported by the neck without resisting. This reflex, also known as clipnosis,[19][20] can also be exhibited by adults. Eating patterns[edit] Cat eating "cat grass" Calico cat drinking water from a glass. Cats are obligate carnivores and do not do well on herbivore diets. In the wild they usually hunt smaller mammals to keep themselves nourished. Many cats find and chew small quantities of long grass, but this is not for its nutritional value per se. The eating of grass seems to stem from feline ancestry and has nothing to do with dietary requirements. It is believed that feline ancestors instead ate grass to purge intestinal parasites.[21] Cats have no sweet taste receptors on their tongue and thus cannot taste sweet things at all. Cats mainly smell for their food, and what they taste for is amino acids instead. This may be a cause of cats being diagnosed with diabetes. The food that domestic cats get has a lot of carbohydrates in it, and a high sugar content cannot be efficiently processed by the digestive system of cats.[22] Cats drink water by lapping the surface with their tongue. A fraction of a teaspoon of water is taken up with each lap. Although some desert cats are able to obtain much of their water needs through the flesh of their prey, most cats come to bodies of water to drink.[23] Eating patterns are another indicator to understand behavior changes in domestic cats. Changes in typical eating patterns can be an early signal for possible physical or psychological health problems. [24] A cat's eating pattern in a domestic setting is essential for the cat and owner bond to form. This happens because cats form attachments to households that regularly feed them.[25] Some cats ask for food dozens of times a day, including at night, with rubbing, pacing, meowing, or sometimes loud purring. Sleeping patterns[edit] More than half of cats sleep between 12 and 18 hours a day, sometimes even more. Most cats sleep more as they age. [26] This can explain why cats are crepuscular, mostly being active during the night.[27] Excretion[edit] Cats tend to bury their feces after defecating and can be attracted to a litter box if it has attractant in it. Cats will also generally defecate more in those litter boxes.[28] Socialization[edit] Socialization is defined as a member of a specific group learning to be part of that group.[29] It is said to be a continuous learning process that allows an individual to learn the necessary skills and behaviors required for a particular social position.[30] Cats, domestic or wild, do participate in social behaviors, even though it is thought that most cat species (besides lions) are solitary, anti-social animals.[31] Under certain circumstances, such as food availability, shelter, or protection, cats can be seen in groups.[31] The social behaviors that cats participate in are colony organization, social learning, socialization between cats, and socialization with humans. Colony organization[edit] Free-living domestic cats tend to form colonies.[32] Small colonies consist of one female, known as a queen, and her kittens. Large colonies consist of several queens and their kittens.[32] Male cats are present in both types of colonies and serve the purpose of reproduction and defending territory. Within these colonies altruistic behavior occurs. This means that if an expecting queen helps another queen that just gave birth, then the helping queen will get help in return when she gives birth.[32] Although free living cats are found in colonies, stable social order, like that of the lion, does not exist.[31] Free living cats usually are found in colonies for protection against predators, and for food availability.[31] Although there are many advantages of group living, such as easy access to mates, and defensive measures to protect food, there are also disadvantages, such as sexual competition for mates. If the group gets too big, fights may break out over food.[32] Social learning[edit] Cats are observational learners.[32][33] This type of learning emerges early in a cat's life,[34] and has been shown in many laboratory studies. Young kittens learn to hunt from their mothers by observing their techniques when catching prey.[32] The mother ensures that her kittens learn hunting techniques by first bringing dead prey to the litter, then live prey. She demonstrates the techniques required for successful capture to her kittens by bringing live prey to the litter for the kittens to catch themselves.[32] Prey-catching behavior of kittens improves over time when mothers are present .[35] Observational learning for cats can be described in terms of the drive to complete the behavior, the cue that initiates the behavior, the response to the cue, and the reward for completing the behavior.[34] This is shown when cats learn predatory behavior from their mothers. The drive is hunger, the cue is the prey, the response is to catch the prey, and the reward is to relieve the hunger sensation. Kittens also show observational learning when they are socializing with humans. They are more likely to initiate socialization with humans when their mothers are exhibiting non-aggressive and non-defensive behaviors.[32] Even though mothers spend most time with their kittens, male cats play an important role by breaking up fights among litter mates.[32] Observational learning is not limited to kittens. It can also be observed during adulthood. Studies have been done with adult cats performing a task, such as pressing a lever after a visual cue.[33] Adult cats that see others performing a task learn to perform the same task faster than those who did not witness another cat performing it.[33] Socialization between cats[edit] When strange cats meet, they ideally cautiously allow each other to smell their hindquarters, but this does not happen very often.[36] Usually when strange cats meet, one cat makes a sudden movement that puts the other cat into a defensive mode. The subordinate cat will then draw in on itself and prepare to attack if needed.[36] If an attack happens, the subordinate cat will usually run away, but this does not happen all the time and it could lead to a tomcat duel.[36] Dominance is also seen as an underlying factor for how conspecifics -- members of the same species -- interact with each other. Dominance can be seen among cats in multi-cat households. It can be seen when other cats submit to the dominant cat. Dominance includes such behaviors as the subordinate cat walking around the dominant cat, waiting for the dominant cat to walk past, avoiding eye contact, crouching, lying on its side (defensive posture), and retreating when the dominant cat approaches.[32] The dominant cat presents a specific body posture as well. Its ears are straight up, the base of its tail is arched, and it looks directly at the subordinate cat.[32] Dominant cats are usually not aggressive, but if a subordinate cat blocks food they may become aggressive.[37] When this aggressive behavior occurs, it can also lead to the dominant cat preventing subordinate cats from eating and using the litter box.[32] This can cause the subordinate cat to defecate somewhere else and create problems with human interaction.[32] Social conflicts[edit] Two cats fighting Social conflicts among cats depend solely on the behavior of the cats. Some research has shown that cats rarely pick fights, but when they do, it's usually for protecting food and/or litters, and defending territory.[37] The first sign of an imminent tomcat duel is when both cats draw themselves up high on their legs, all hair along the middle of their backs stands straight up, and they mew and howl loudly as they approach each other.[36] The steps the cats make become slower and shorter the closer they get to each other. Once they are close enough to attack, they pause slightly, and then one cat leaps and tries to bite the nape of the other cat.[36] The other cat has no choice but to retaliate, and both cats roll aggressively on the ground, with loud and intense screams by both.[36] After some time the cats separate and stand face to face to begin the attack all over again. This can go on for some time until one cat does not get up again and remains seated.[36] The defeated cat does not move until the victor has completed a sniff of the area and moves outside the fighting area. Once this happens, the defeated cat leaves the area, ending the duel.[36] Females may also fight with each other, and male-female fights can occur as well. Cats may need to be reintroduced or separated to avoid fights in a closed household. Socialization with humans[edit] Cats have learned how to develop their vocals in order to converse with humans, trying to tell humans what they want. One way cats and humans interact is through "head bunting," in which a cat rubs its head on a human in order to leave its scent to claim territory and create a bond.[38] Cats can sometimes take cues from human pointing and from the direction of human gazes. They can sometimes discriminate between, and sometimes even correlate, human facial expressions, attentional states, and voices. Besides its own name, a cat can sometimes learn the names of humans and other cats.[39] Cats age three to nine weeks are sensitive to human socialization;[40] after this period socialization can be less effective.[41] Studies have shown that the earlier a kitten is handled, the less fearful it will be toward humans.[41] Other factors that can enhance socialization are having many people handle the kitten frequently, the presence of the mother, and feeding.[40][41] The presence of the mother is important because cats are observational learners. If the mother is comfortable around humans, it can reduce anxiety in the kitten and promote the kitten-human relationship.[40][42] Feral kittens around two to seven weeks old can be socialized, usually within a month of capture.[43] Some species of cats cannot be socialized toward humans because of factors such as genetic influence and in some cases specific learning experiences.[43] The best way to get a kitten to socialize is to handle it for many hours a week.[43] The process is made easier if there is another socialized cat present but not necessarily in the same space as the feral cat. If the handler can get a cat to urinate in the litter tray, then the others in a litter will usually follow. Initial contact with thick gloves is highly recommended until trust is established, usually within the first week. Socializing an adult is challenging. Socialized adult feral cats tend to trust only those they trusted in their socialization period, and can be very fearful around strangers.[43] Cats can be companion animals. Studies have shown that these cats provide many physiological and psychological benefits for the owner.[41] Other aspects of cat behavior that are deemed advantageous for the human-cat bond are cat hygiene (cats are known for good hygiene)[44] and they do not have to be taken outside (use of the litter box). Cats are perfect for smaller spaces, and they have no problems with being left alone for extended periods.[41] Even though there are a number of benefits of owning a cat, there are a number of problematic behaviors that can affect the human-cat relationship. One behavior is when cats attack people by clawing and biting.[33] This often occurs spontaneously or is triggered by sudden movements.[33] Another problematic behavior is the "petting and biting syndrome," which involves the cat being petted and then suddenly attacking and running away.[33] Other problems are house soiling, scratching furniture, and when a cat brings dead prey into the house.[44] There are 52 measured personality traits in cats, with one study saying "five reliable personality factors were found using principal axis factor analysis: neuroticism, extroversion, dominance, impulsiveness and agreeableness."[45] Predatory behavior[edit] A domestic cat with its prey, a deer mouse Cats are natural predators. When allowed to roam outdoors, many cats will engage in predation on wildlife. Understanding an indoor cat's personality can go a long way toward satisfying their instincts and avoid potentially inconvenient behavior (such as sudden hissing, dashing around the house, or climbing the curtains). Environmental enrichment items include:[46] A good-sized cat tree, with scratching posts Toys that provide a release for their predatory instincts[47] A well kept litter box or toilet Fresh water and dry cat food Social interaction Environment[edit] Cats like to organize their environment based on their needs. Like their ancestors, domestic cats still have an inherent desire to maintain an independent territory but are generally content to live with other cats for company as they easily get bored. Living alone for a longer time may cause them to forget how to communicate with other cats.[48] Sometimes adding a kitten to a household can be a bad idea. If there already is an older cat present and another cat is added, it may be better to get another older cat that has been socialized with other cats. When a kitten is introduced to a mature cat, that cat may show feline asocial aggression, in which they feel threatened and act aggressive to drive off the intruder. If this happens, the kitten and the cat should be separated and slowly introduced by rubbing towels on the animals and presenting the towel to the other.[49] Cats use scent and pheromones to help organize their territory by marking prominent objects. If these objects or scents are removed, it upsets the cat's perception of its environment. See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cat behavior. Cat behaviorist Cat communication Cat play and toys Ethology Cat training References[edit] ^ Shipley, C; Buchwald, J.S; Carterette, E.C (January 1988). "The role of auditory feedback in the vocalizations of cats". Experimental Brain Research. 69 (2): 431–438. doi:10.1007/bf00247589. PMID 3345817. S2CID 31184802. ^ "Cats." Gale In Context Online Collection, Gale, 2018. Gale In Context: College, link.gale.com/apps/doc/LQLWOQ026686444/GPS?u=brookdalecc&sid=bookmark-GPS&xid=7afb5516. Accessed 10 Apr. 2023. ^ Kelley, JaneA (2017-06-05). "Scientists Discover New Meaning for Cat Chattering". Catster. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ "The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language". Tuft + Paw. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ Pachel, Christopher (May 2014). "Intercat Aggression: Restoring Harmony in the Home: A Guide for Practitioners". The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice. 44 (3): 565–579. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2014.01.007. PMID 24766700. ^ Humphrey, Tasmin; Proops, Leanne; Forman, Jemma; Spooner, Rebecca; McComb, Karen (2020-10-05). "The role of cat eye narrowing movements in cat–human communication". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 16503. Bibcode:2020NatSR..1016503H. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-73426-0. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 7536207. PMID 33020542. ^ Dr. Jennifer Coates, DVM (22 April 2013). "Synthetic Feline Facial Pheromones: Making Recommendations in the Absence of Definitive Data, Part 1". petMD. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2014. ^ "Feliway". Archived from the original on 2015-05-02. Retrieved 2015-02-03. ^ "The Indoor Cat Initiative" (PDF). The Ohio State University, College of Veterinary Medicine. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-18. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ "Test to determine how well you know feline body language". Archived from the original on 2018-06-20. Retrieved 2016-09-12. ^ An Ethogram for Behavioral Studies of the Domestic Cat. UFAW Animal Welfare Research Report No 8. UK Cat Behavior Working Group, 1995. ^ "Reading Your Cat". Animal Planet. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ Eckstein, Robert A.; Hart, Benjamin L. (2000). "Grooming and Control of Fleas in Cats". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 68 (2): 141–50. doi:10.1016/s0168-1591(00)00095-2. PMID 10771322. ^ Schwartz, Stefanie (June 2003). "Separation anxiety syndrome in dogs and cats". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 222 (11): 1526–32. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.222.1526. PMID 12784957. ^ McPherson, F.J; Chenoweth, P.J (April 2012). "Mammalian sexual dimorphism". Animal Reproduction Science. 131 (3–4): 109–122. doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.02.007. PMID 22482798. ^ Spielman, Dr. Bari. "Panting in Cats: Is It Normal?". Retrieved 2010-01-07. ^ "Cat Panting Explained". The Cat Health Guide. Retrieved 2011-07-02. ^ Adams, Cecil (1996-07-19). "Do cats always land unharmed on their feet, no matter how far they fall?". The Straight Dope. Chicago Reader. Retrieved 2007-11-07. ^ Robbie Gonzalez (22 November 2013). "The one myth about cats that's actually true". Gizmodo. Retrieved 21 May 2018. ^ Pozza, M. E.; Stella, J. L.; Chappuis-Gagnon, A. C.; Wagner, S. O.; Buffington, C. A. (2008). "Pinch-induced behavioral inhibition ('clipnosis') in domestic cats". Journal of Feline Medicine & Surgery. 10 (1): 82–7. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2007.10.008. PMID 18222719. S2CID 46156902. ^ Hart, Benjamin (December 2008). "Why do dogs and cats eat grass?". Veterinary Medicine. 103 (12): 648. ^ Li, Xia (July 2006). "Cats lack a sweet taste receptor". The Journal of Nutrition. 136 (7): 1932S–1934S. doi:10.1093/jn/136.7.1932s. PMC 2063449. PMID 16772462. ^ Macdonald, Rogers (1984). "Nutrition of the domestic cat, a mammalian carnivore". Annual Review of Nutrition. 4 (1): 521–562. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.4.1.521. PMID 6380542. ^ "What You Need To Do If Your Cat Not Eating Much But Acting Normal". Walk With Cat. 2019-09-26. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ Bradshaw, J. W. S., & Cook, S. E. (1996). Patterns of Pet Cat Behaviour at Feeding Occasions. Applied Animal Behavioral Science 47(1), 61-64. DOI: doi.org/10.1016/0168-1591(95)01011-4 ^ Izawa, Masako (1983). "Daily Activities of the Feral Cat Felis catus LINN.*". Retrieved 1 May 2023. ^ Piccione, Giuseppe; Marafioti, Simona; Giannetto, Claudia; Panzera, Michele; Fazio, Francesco (2013-07-01). "Daily rhythm of total activity pattern in domestic cats (Felis silvestris catus) maintained in two different housing conditions". Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 8 (4): 189–194. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2012.09.004. ISSN 1558-7878. ^ Frayne, Jennifer; Murray, Sarah Macdonald; Croney, Candace; Flickinger, Elizabeth; Edwards, Michelle; Shoveller, Anna Kate (2019). "The Behavioural Effects of Innovative Litter Developed to Attract Cats". Animals. 9 (9): 683. doi:10.3390/ani9090683. PMC 6770919. PMID 31540016. ^ "Socialization". Encyclopedia Britannica. October 18, 2018. ^ "Socialization". Dictionary.com. October 18, 2018. ^ a b c d Spotte, Stephen (2014). Free-Ranging Cats: Behaviour, Ecology, & Management. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. pp. 49–59. ISBN 978-1-118-88401-0. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Crowell-Davis, Sharon, L. (2007). "Cat Behaviour: Social Organization, Communication, & Development". The Welfare of Cats. Netherlands: Springer, Dordrecht. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ a b c d e f Bradshaw, John W. S. (1992). The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. Wallingford: CAB International. pp. 78, 198–200. ISBN 0-85198-715-X. ^ a b Alder, H.E. (1955). "Some Factors of Observational Learning". The Journal of Genetic Psychology. 86 (1): 159–177. doi:10.1080/00221325.1955.10532903. PMID 14354164. ProQuest 1297110751. ^ Caro, T. M. (1980). "Effects of the Mother, Object Play, and Adult Experience on Predation in Cats". Behavioral and Neural Biology. 29 (1): 29–51. doi:10.1016/S0163-1047(80)92456-5. PMID 7387584. ^ a b c d e f g h Leyhausen, Paul (1979). Cat Behaviour: The Predatory & Social Behaviour of Domestic & Wild Cats. New York, New York: Garland Publishing Inc. pp. 164–216, 227–231. ISBN 978-0-8240-7017-5. ^ a b Beadle, Muriel (1977). The Cat: History, Biology, and Behaviour. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 100–111. ISBN 978-0-671-22451-6. ^ "Bunting Behavior – Answers, Why, When & How of Cat Behavior Issues by Pam Johnson-Bennett". www.catbehaviorassociates.com. 2012-05-03. Retrieved 2018-12-03. ^ Takagi, Saho; Saito, Atsuko; Arahori, Minori; Chijiiwa, Hitomi; Koyasu, Hikari; Nagasawa, Miho; Kikusui, Takefumi; Fujita, Kazuo; Kuroshima, Hika (13 April 2022). "Cats learn the names of their friend cats in their daily lives". Scientific Reports. 12 (1): 6155. Bibcode:2022NatSR..12.6155T. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-10261-5. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 9007945. PMID 35418204. S2CID 248155872. ^ a b c Turner, Dennis C.; Bateson, Patrick (1988). The Domestic Cat: The Biology of its Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 112–113, 159–168. ISBN 978-0-521-35447-9. ^ a b c d e Bernstein, Penny L. (2007). "The Human-Cat Relationship". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 47–89. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ "Why Does My Cat Follow Me Everywhere In The House". Walk With Cat. 2019-10-03. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ a b c d Casey, Rachel; Bradshaw, John (November 2008). "The effects of additional socialisation for kittens in a rescue centre on their behaviour and suitability as a pet". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 114 (1–2): 196–205. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2008.01.003. ^ a b Heath, Sarah E. (2007). "Behaviour Problems and Welfare". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 91–107. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ Roetman, Philip; Kikillus, K. Heidy; Chiera, Belinda; Tindle, Hayley; Quinton, Gillian; Litchfield, Carla A. (2017-08-23). "The 'Feline Five': An exploration of personality in pet cats (Felis catus)". PLOS ONE. 12 (8): e0183455. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1283455L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0183455. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 5568325. PMID 28832622. ^ Herron, Meghan. "Environmental Enrichment for Indoor Cats" (PDF). Ohio State University. OSU. ^ "The Dangers of Strings, Ribbons, and Yarn for Cats". ^ "One Kitten or Two?". Archived from the original on 2018-06-21. Retrieved 2015-09-17. ^ Beaver, Bonnie (September 2004). "Fractious cats and feline aggression". Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 6 (1): 13–18. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2003.09.011. PMID 15123162. S2CID 525291. Bishko, Adriane. "What Your Cat's Body Language Is Saying". WebMD Pet. WebMD. Retrieved 1 December 2018. vteDomestic catsFelinology Anatomy Genetics Dwarf cat Kitten Odd-eyed cat Squitten Coat genetics Bicolor cat Black cat Calico cat Tabby cat Tortoiseshell cat Health Aging Declawing Diet dental health senior Vaccination Behavior Cat–dog relationship Catfight Catnip valerian Communication Meow Purr Kneading Intelligence Play and toys Righting reflex Senses Human–catinteraction Ailurophobia Cat cafés Cat killers Cat massage Cat meat Cat-scratch disease Cat show Cats in ancient Egypt Cultural depictions fictional Internet Feral cat Cats and Islam Lolcat National Cat Day Pet cat Puppy cat Working cat Bodega cat Farm cat Library cat Ship's cat Zoonosis Registries American Cat Fanciers Association Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana Canadian Cat Association Cat Aficionado Association Cat Fanciers' Association Fédération Internationale Féline Governing Council of the Cat Fancy New Zealand Cat Fancy Southern Africa Cat Council The International Cat Association World Cat Congress World Cat Federation Breeds(full list)(experimental)Fullydomestic Abyssinian American Curl American Shorthair Balinese Brazilian Shorthair British Shorthair Birman Bombay Burmese Burmilla California Spangled Chartreux Chinese Li Hua Colorpoint Shorthair Cornish Rex Cymric Devon Rex Donskoy Egyptian Mau European Shorthair Exotic Shorthair German Rex Himalayan Japanese Bobtail Javanese Khao Manee Korat Kurilian Bobtail Lykoi Maine Coon Manx Munchkin Neva Masquerade Norwegian Forest Ocicat Ojos Azules Oriental Shorthair Persian Peterbald Pixie-bob Ragdoll Ragamuffin Russian Blue Scottish Fold Selkirk Rex Siamese Siberian Singapura Snowshoe Somali Sphynx Thai Traditional Persian Tonkinese Toyger Turkish Angora Turkish Van Hybrid Bengal Chausie Highlander Savannah Serengeti Landraces Aegean Cyprus Domestic long-haired Domestic short-haired Kellas Sokoke Van Diseases anddisorders Acne Asthma Calicivirus Congenital sensorineural deafness Feline corneal sequestrum Flea Coccidia Heartworm Hepatic lipidosis Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Immunodeficiency virus Infectious peritonitis Leukemia virus Lower urinary tract disease Panleukopenia Giardiasis Polydactyly Rabies Ringworm Tritrichomonas foetus Roundworm Skin disorders Tick Toxoplasmosis Viral rhinotracheitis Cats by country Australia Canada Japan New Zealand United Kingdom United States Related List of individual cats List of oldest cats Cats in folklore Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cat_behavior&oldid=1177443160" Categories: Cat behaviorAnimal communicationEthologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from October 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from July 2012All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesCommons category link is on WikidataArticles containing video clips This page was last edited on 27 September 2023, at 16:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Communication Toggle Communication subsection 1.1Body language 1.1.1The tail 1.1.2The eyes 1.2Scent rubbing and spraying 1.3Body postures 2Grooming 3Kneading 4Panting 5Reflexes Toggle Reflexes subsection 5.1Righting reflex 5.2Freeze reflex 6Eating patterns 7Sleeping patterns 8Excretion 9Socialization Toggle Socialization subsection 9.1Colony organization 9.2Social learning 9.3Socialization between cats 9.3.1Social conflicts 9.4Socialization with humans 10Predatory behavior 11Environment 12See also 13References Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Cat behavior 3 languages ČeštinaEspañol한국어 Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Behavior of cats This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Cat behavior" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Cat behavior is a cat's behavior and responses to events and other stimuli. Cat behavior includes body language, elimination habits, aggression, play, communication, hunting, grooming, urine marking, and face rubbing. It varies among individuals, colonies, and breeds. Communication and sociability can vary greatly among individual cats. In a family with many cats, the interactions can change depending on which individuals are present and how restricted the territory and resources are. One or more individuals may become aggressive: fighting may occur with the attack, resulting in scratches and deep bite wounds. Communication[edit] Main article: Cat communication A staring cat Kittens vocalize early in development. Some examples of different vocalizations are described below.[1] Purring - means that the cat is either content or is self-soothing due to fear Meowing - a frequently used greeting. A mother meows when interacting with her young. Meows can also be used when a cat wishes for attention. [2] Hissing or spitting - indicates an angry or defensive cat. Yowling - means that the cat is in distress or feeling aggressive. Chattering - occurs when hunting or tracking potential prey. This consists of quick chirps made while the mouth vibrates. The gaze is fixed and staring. This behavior may be in response to a surge of adrenaline or may be caused by the anticipation of a pending hunt.[3] Body language[edit] Cats greeting by rubbing against each other; the upright "question mark shape" tails indicate happiness or friendship Cats rely strongly on body language to communicate. A cat may rub against an object or lick a person. Much of a cat's body language is through its tail, ears, head position, and back posture. The tail[edit] Observing how a cat holds its tail can give a good sense of the cat’s current temperament. Held high, may have a slight curl forward - a sign of friendliness. The cat is happy, content, and comfortable. The tail may quiver or vibrate if the cat is excited. Held low and tucked under - a sign of fear or unease. The cat is attempting to make itself a smaller target to potential threats. Flicking, twitching - a sign of agitation. The cat is on high alert or is upset, and is not receptive to interaction. Cats may also flick their tails in an oscillating, snake-like motion, or abruptly from side to side, often just before pouncing on an object or animal. [4] The eyes[edit] When cats greet another cat in their vicinity, they can do a slow, languid, long blink to communicate affection if they trust the person or animal they are in contact with. One way to communicate love and trust to a cat is to say its name, get its attention, look it in the eyes and then slowly blink at it to emulate trust and love. They may return the gesture.[5] In a study of 18 cats, the cat behavior of several half-blinks followed by a prolonged eye narrowing or eye closure was found to be a positive emotional response. When a familiar human slow-blinks towards a cat, the cat tends to approach the human more frequently than if the human has a neutral expression that avoids eye contact. This behavior may share features with the "genuine" human smile that involves the corners of the eyes narrowing.[6] Scent rubbing and spraying[edit] These behaviors are thought to be a way of marking territory. Facial marking behavior is used to mark their territory as "safe". The cat rubs its cheeks on prominent objects in the preferred territory, depositing a chemical pheromone, known as a contentment pheromone. Synthetic versions of the feline facial pheromone are available commercially.[7][8] Cats have anal sacs or scent glands. Scent is deposited on the feces as it is eliminated. Unlike intact male cats, female and neutered male cats usually do not spray urine. Spraying is accomplished by backing up against a vertical surface and spraying a jet of urine on that surface. Unlike a dog's penis, a cat's penis points backward. Males neutered in adulthood may still spray after neutering. Urinating on horizontal surfaces in the home outside the litter box may indicate dissatisfaction with the box, due to a variety of factors such as substrate texture, cleanliness and privacy. It can also be a sign of urinary tract problems. Male cats on poor diets are susceptible to crystal formation in the urine, which can block the urethra and create a medical emergency. Body postures[edit] A cat's posture communicates its emotions. It is best to observe cats' natural behavior when they are by themselves, with humans, and with other animals.[9] Their postures can be friendly or aggressive, depending on the situation. Some of the most basic and familiar cat postures include:[10][11] Relaxed posture – The cat is seen lying on the side or sitting. Its breathing is slow to normal, with legs bent, or hind legs laid out or extended. The tail is loosely wrapped, extended, or held up. It also hangs down loosely when the cat is standing. Stretching posture – another posture indicating the cat is relaxed.Cat yawning postureYawning posture – either by itself or in conjunction with a stretch: another posture of a relaxed cat. Alert posture – The cat is lying on its belly, or it may be sitting. Its back is almost horizontal when standing and moving. Its breathing is normal, with its legs bent or extended (when standing). Its tail is curved back or straight upward, and there may be twitching while the tail is positioned downward. Tense posture – The cat is lying on its belly, with the back of its body lower than its upper body (slinking) when standing or moving back. Its legs, including the hind legs, are bent, and its front legs are extended when standing. Its tail is close to the body, tensed or curled downward. There can be twitching when the cat is standing up. Anxious/ovulating posture – The cat is lying on its belly. The back of the body is visibly lower than the front part when the cat is standing or moving. Its breathing may be fast, and its legs are tucked under its body. The tail is close to the body and may be curled forward (or close to the body when standing), with the tip of the tail moving up and down or side to side. Fearful posture – The cat is lying on its belly or crouching directly on top of its paws. Its entire body may be shaking and very near the ground when standing up. Breathing is fast, with the cat's legs bent near the surface, and its tail is curled and very close to its body when standing on all fours. Confident posture – The cat may walk around in a more comfortable manner with its tail up to the sky, indicating its importance. Cats often walk through houses with their tail standing up high above them, making them look grander and more elegant. Terrified posture – The cat is crouched directly on top of its paws, with visible shaking seen in some parts of the body. Its tail is close to the body, and can be standing up, together with its hair on the back. The legs are very stiff or even bent to increase their size. Typically, cats avoid contact when they feel threatened, although they can resort to varying degrees of aggression when they feel cornered, or when escape is impossible.[12] Relaxing cat Stretching cat Yawning cat Yawning kitten Alert cat Tense cat Fearful cat Terrified cat Grooming[edit] Cat grooming itself Oral grooming for domestic and feral cats is a common behavior; recent studies on domestic cats show that they spend about 8% of resting time grooming themselves. Grooming is extremely important not only to clean themselves but also to ensure ectoparasite control. Fleas tend to be the most common ectoparasite of cats, and some studies allude to indirect evidence that grooming in cats is effective in removing fleas. Cats not only use their tongue for grooming to control ectoparasites, and scratch grooming may also aid in dislodging fleas from the head and neck.[13] Kneading[edit] Main article: Kneading (cats) Classic kneading of a cat Kittens "knead" the breast while suckling, using the forelimbs one at a time in an alternating pattern to push against the mammary glands to stimulate lactation in the mother. Cats carry these infantile behaviors beyond nursing and into adulthood. Some cats "nurse," i.e. suck, on clothing or bedding during kneading. The cat exerts firm downward pressure with its paw, opening its toes to expose its claws, then closes its claws as it lifts its paw. The process takes place with alternate paws at intervals of one to two seconds. The cat may knead while sitting on its owner's lap, which may prove painful if the cat has sharp claws. Because most of the preferred "domestic traits" are neotenous, or juvenile traits that persist in the adult, kneading may be a relic juvenile behavior retained in adult domestic cats.[14] It may also stimulate the cat and make it feel good, in the same manner as a human stretching. Kneading is often a precursor to sleeping. Many cats purr while kneading. They also purr mostly when newborn, when feeding, or when trying to feed on their mother's teat. The common association between the two behaviors may corroborate the evidence in favor of the origin of kneading as a remnant instinct.[15] Panting[edit] A cat panting Unlike dogs, panting is a rare occurrence in cats, except in warm weather environments. Cats may pant in response to anxiety, fear or excitement. Panting can also be caused by play, exercise, or stress from things like car rides. However, if panting is excessive or the cat appears in distress, it may be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as a nasal blockage, heartworm disease, head trauma, or drug poisoning.[16] In many cases, feline panting, especially if accompanied by other symptoms, such as coughing or shallow breathing (dyspnea), is considered to be abnormal, and should be treated as a medical emergency.[17] Reflexes[edit] Righting reflex[edit] Main article: Cat righting reflex Chronophotography of a falling cat by Étienne-Jules Marey, 1894 The righting reflex is the attempt of cats to land on their feet at the completion of a jump or a fall. They can do this more easily than other animals due to their flexible spine, floating collarbone, and loose skin. Cats also use vision and their vestibular apparatus to help tell which way to turn. They can then stretch themselves out and relax their muscles. The righting reflex does not always result in the cat landing on its feet.[18] Freeze reflex[edit] Adult cats are able to make use of pinch-induced behavioural inhibition to induce a "freeze reflex" in their young, which enables them to be transported by the neck without resisting. This reflex, also known as clipnosis,[19][20] can also be exhibited by adults. Eating patterns[edit] Cat eating "cat grass" Calico cat drinking water from a glass. Cats are obligate carnivores and do not do well on herbivore diets. In the wild they usually hunt smaller mammals to keep themselves nourished. Many cats find and chew small quantities of long grass, but this is not for its nutritional value per se. The eating of grass seems to stem from feline ancestry and has nothing to do with dietary requirements. It is believed that feline ancestors instead ate grass to purge intestinal parasites.[21] Cats have no sweet taste receptors on their tongue and thus cannot taste sweet things at all. Cats mainly smell for their food, and what they taste for is amino acids instead. This may be a cause of cats being diagnosed with diabetes. The food that domestic cats get has a lot of carbohydrates in it, and a high sugar content cannot be efficiently processed by the digestive system of cats.[22] Cats drink water by lapping the surface with their tongue. A fraction of a teaspoon of water is taken up with each lap. Although some desert cats are able to obtain much of their water needs through the flesh of their prey, most cats come to bodies of water to drink.[23] Eating patterns are another indicator to understand behavior changes in domestic cats. Changes in typical eating patterns can be an early signal for possible physical or psychological health problems. [24] A cat's eating pattern in a domestic setting is essential for the cat and owner bond to form. This happens because cats form attachments to households that regularly feed them.[25] Some cats ask for food dozens of times a day, including at night, with rubbing, pacing, meowing, or sometimes loud purring. Sleeping patterns[edit] More than half of cats sleep between 12 and 18 hours a day, sometimes even more. Most cats sleep more as they age. [26] This can explain why cats are crepuscular, mostly being active during the night.[27] Excretion[edit] Cats tend to bury their feces after defecating and can be attracted to a litter box if it has attractant in it. Cats will also generally defecate more in those litter boxes.[28] Socialization[edit] Socialization is defined as a member of a specific group learning to be part of that group.[29] It is said to be a continuous learning process that allows an individual to learn the necessary skills and behaviors required for a particular social position.[30] Cats, domestic or wild, do participate in social behaviors, even though it is thought that most cat species (besides lions) are solitary, anti-social animals.[31] Under certain circumstances, such as food availability, shelter, or protection, cats can be seen in groups.[31] The social behaviors that cats participate in are colony organization, social learning, socialization between cats, and socialization with humans. Colony organization[edit] Free-living domestic cats tend to form colonies.[32] Small colonies consist of one female, known as a queen, and her kittens. Large colonies consist of several queens and their kittens.[32] Male cats are present in both types of colonies and serve the purpose of reproduction and defending territory. Within these colonies altruistic behavior occurs. This means that if an expecting queen helps another queen that just gave birth, then the helping queen will get help in return when she gives birth.[32] Although free living cats are found in colonies, stable social order, like that of the lion, does not exist.[31] Free living cats usually are found in colonies for protection against predators, and for food availability.[31] Although there are many advantages of group living, such as easy access to mates, and defensive measures to protect food, there are also disadvantages, such as sexual competition for mates. If the group gets too big, fights may break out over food.[32] Social learning[edit] Cats are observational learners.[32][33] This type of learning emerges early in a cat's life,[34] and has been shown in many laboratory studies. Young kittens learn to hunt from their mothers by observing their techniques when catching prey.[32] The mother ensures that her kittens learn hunting techniques by first bringing dead prey to the litter, then live prey. She demonstrates the techniques required for successful capture to her kittens by bringing live prey to the litter for the kittens to catch themselves.[32] Prey-catching behavior of kittens improves over time when mothers are present .[35] Observational learning for cats can be described in terms of the drive to complete the behavior, the cue that initiates the behavior, the response to the cue, and the reward for completing the behavior.[34] This is shown when cats learn predatory behavior from their mothers. The drive is hunger, the cue is the prey, the response is to catch the prey, and the reward is to relieve the hunger sensation. Kittens also show observational learning when they are socializing with humans. They are more likely to initiate socialization with humans when their mothers are exhibiting non-aggressive and non-defensive behaviors.[32] Even though mothers spend most time with their kittens, male cats play an important role by breaking up fights among litter mates.[32] Observational learning is not limited to kittens. It can also be observed during adulthood. Studies have been done with adult cats performing a task, such as pressing a lever after a visual cue.[33] Adult cats that see others performing a task learn to perform the same task faster than those who did not witness another cat performing it.[33] Socialization between cats[edit] When strange cats meet, they ideally cautiously allow each other to smell their hindquarters, but this does not happen very often.[36] Usually when strange cats meet, one cat makes a sudden movement that puts the other cat into a defensive mode. The subordinate cat will then draw in on itself and prepare to attack if needed.[36] If an attack happens, the subordinate cat will usually run away, but this does not happen all the time and it could lead to a tomcat duel.[36] Dominance is also seen as an underlying factor for how conspecifics -- members of the same species -- interact with each other. Dominance can be seen among cats in multi-cat households. It can be seen when other cats submit to the dominant cat. Dominance includes such behaviors as the subordinate cat walking around the dominant cat, waiting for the dominant cat to walk past, avoiding eye contact, crouching, lying on its side (defensive posture), and retreating when the dominant cat approaches.[32] The dominant cat presents a specific body posture as well. Its ears are straight up, the base of its tail is arched, and it looks directly at the subordinate cat.[32] Dominant cats are usually not aggressive, but if a subordinate cat blocks food they may become aggressive.[37] When this aggressive behavior occurs, it can also lead to the dominant cat preventing subordinate cats from eating and using the litter box.[32] This can cause the subordinate cat to defecate somewhere else and create problems with human interaction.[32] Social conflicts[edit] Two cats fighting Social conflicts among cats depend solely on the behavior of the cats. Some research has shown that cats rarely pick fights, but when they do, it's usually for protecting food and/or litters, and defending territory.[37] The first sign of an imminent tomcat duel is when both cats draw themselves up high on their legs, all hair along the middle of their backs stands straight up, and they mew and howl loudly as they approach each other.[36] The steps the cats make become slower and shorter the closer they get to each other. Once they are close enough to attack, they pause slightly, and then one cat leaps and tries to bite the nape of the other cat.[36] The other cat has no choice but to retaliate, and both cats roll aggressively on the ground, with loud and intense screams by both.[36] After some time the cats separate and stand face to face to begin the attack all over again. This can go on for some time until one cat does not get up again and remains seated.[36] The defeated cat does not move until the victor has completed a sniff of the area and moves outside the fighting area. Once this happens, the defeated cat leaves the area, ending the duel.[36] Females may also fight with each other, and male-female fights can occur as well. Cats may need to be reintroduced or separated to avoid fights in a closed household. Socialization with humans[edit] Cats have learned how to develop their vocals in order to converse with humans, trying to tell humans what they want. One way cats and humans interact is through "head bunting," in which a cat rubs its head on a human in order to leave its scent to claim territory and create a bond.[38] Cats can sometimes take cues from human pointing and from the direction of human gazes. They can sometimes discriminate between, and sometimes even correlate, human facial expressions, attentional states, and voices. Besides its own name, a cat can sometimes learn the names of humans and other cats.[39] Cats age three to nine weeks are sensitive to human socialization;[40] after this period socialization can be less effective.[41] Studies have shown that the earlier a kitten is handled, the less fearful it will be toward humans.[41] Other factors that can enhance socialization are having many people handle the kitten frequently, the presence of the mother, and feeding.[40][41] The presence of the mother is important because cats are observational learners. If the mother is comfortable around humans, it can reduce anxiety in the kitten and promote the kitten-human relationship.[40][42] Feral kittens around two to seven weeks old can be socialized, usually within a month of capture.[43] Some species of cats cannot be socialized toward humans because of factors such as genetic influence and in some cases specific learning experiences.[43] The best way to get a kitten to socialize is to handle it for many hours a week.[43] The process is made easier if there is another socialized cat present but not necessarily in the same space as the feral cat. If the handler can get a cat to urinate in the litter tray, then the others in a litter will usually follow. Initial contact with thick gloves is highly recommended until trust is established, usually within the first week. Socializing an adult is challenging. Socialized adult feral cats tend to trust only those they trusted in their socialization period, and can be very fearful around strangers.[43] Cats can be companion animals. Studies have shown that these cats provide many physiological and psychological benefits for the owner.[41] Other aspects of cat behavior that are deemed advantageous for the human-cat bond are cat hygiene (cats are known for good hygiene)[44] and they do not have to be taken outside (use of the litter box). Cats are perfect for smaller spaces, and they have no problems with being left alone for extended periods.[41] Even though there are a number of benefits of owning a cat, there are a number of problematic behaviors that can affect the human-cat relationship. One behavior is when cats attack people by clawing and biting.[33] This often occurs spontaneously or is triggered by sudden movements.[33] Another problematic behavior is the "petting and biting syndrome," which involves the cat being petted and then suddenly attacking and running away.[33] Other problems are house soiling, scratching furniture, and when a cat brings dead prey into the house.[44] There are 52 measured personality traits in cats, with one study saying "five reliable personality factors were found using principal axis factor analysis: neuroticism, extroversion, dominance, impulsiveness and agreeableness."[45] Predatory behavior[edit] A domestic cat with its prey, a deer mouse Cats are natural predators. When allowed to roam outdoors, many cats will engage in predation on wildlife. Understanding an indoor cat's personality can go a long way toward satisfying their instincts and avoid potentially inconvenient behavior (such as sudden hissing, dashing around the house, or climbing the curtains). Environmental enrichment items include:[46] A good-sized cat tree, with scratching posts Toys that provide a release for their predatory instincts[47] A well kept litter box or toilet Fresh water and dry cat food Social interaction Environment[edit] Cats like to organize their environment based on their needs. Like their ancestors, domestic cats still have an inherent desire to maintain an independent territory but are generally content to live with other cats for company as they easily get bored. Living alone for a longer time may cause them to forget how to communicate with other cats.[48] Sometimes adding a kitten to a household can be a bad idea. If there already is an older cat present and another cat is added, it may be better to get another older cat that has been socialized with other cats. When a kitten is introduced to a mature cat, that cat may show feline asocial aggression, in which they feel threatened and act aggressive to drive off the intruder. If this happens, the kitten and the cat should be separated and slowly introduced by rubbing towels on the animals and presenting the towel to the other.[49] Cats use scent and pheromones to help organize their territory by marking prominent objects. If these objects or scents are removed, it upsets the cat's perception of its environment. See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cat behavior. Cat behaviorist Cat communication Cat play and toys Ethology Cat training References[edit] ^ Shipley, C; Buchwald, J.S; Carterette, E.C (January 1988). "The role of auditory feedback in the vocalizations of cats". Experimental Brain Research. 69 (2): 431–438. doi:10.1007/bf00247589. PMID 3345817. S2CID 31184802. ^ "Cats." Gale In Context Online Collection, Gale, 2018. Gale In Context: College, link.gale.com/apps/doc/LQLWOQ026686444/GPS?u=brookdalecc&sid=bookmark-GPS&xid=7afb5516. Accessed 10 Apr. 2023. ^ Kelley, JaneA (2017-06-05). "Scientists Discover New Meaning for Cat Chattering". Catster. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ "The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language". Tuft + Paw. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ Pachel, Christopher (May 2014). "Intercat Aggression: Restoring Harmony in the Home: A Guide for Practitioners". The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice. 44 (3): 565–579. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2014.01.007. PMID 24766700. ^ Humphrey, Tasmin; Proops, Leanne; Forman, Jemma; Spooner, Rebecca; McComb, Karen (2020-10-05). "The role of cat eye narrowing movements in cat–human communication". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 16503. Bibcode:2020NatSR..1016503H. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-73426-0. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 7536207. PMID 33020542. ^ Dr. Jennifer Coates, DVM (22 April 2013). "Synthetic Feline Facial Pheromones: Making Recommendations in the Absence of Definitive Data, Part 1". petMD. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2014. ^ "Feliway". Archived from the original on 2015-05-02. Retrieved 2015-02-03. ^ "The Indoor Cat Initiative" (PDF). The Ohio State University, College of Veterinary Medicine. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-18. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ "Test to determine how well you know feline body language". Archived from the original on 2018-06-20. Retrieved 2016-09-12. ^ An Ethogram for Behavioral Studies of the Domestic Cat. UFAW Animal Welfare Research Report No 8. UK Cat Behavior Working Group, 1995. ^ "Reading Your Cat". Animal Planet. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ Eckstein, Robert A.; Hart, Benjamin L. (2000). "Grooming and Control of Fleas in Cats". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 68 (2): 141–50. doi:10.1016/s0168-1591(00)00095-2. PMID 10771322. ^ Schwartz, Stefanie (June 2003). "Separation anxiety syndrome in dogs and cats". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 222 (11): 1526–32. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.222.1526. PMID 12784957. ^ McPherson, F.J; Chenoweth, P.J (April 2012). "Mammalian sexual dimorphism". Animal Reproduction Science. 131 (3–4): 109–122. doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.02.007. PMID 22482798. ^ Spielman, Dr. Bari. "Panting in Cats: Is It Normal?". Retrieved 2010-01-07. ^ "Cat Panting Explained". The Cat Health Guide. Retrieved 2011-07-02. ^ Adams, Cecil (1996-07-19). "Do cats always land unharmed on their feet, no matter how far they fall?". The Straight Dope. Chicago Reader. Retrieved 2007-11-07. ^ Robbie Gonzalez (22 November 2013). "The one myth about cats that's actually true". Gizmodo. Retrieved 21 May 2018. ^ Pozza, M. E.; Stella, J. L.; Chappuis-Gagnon, A. C.; Wagner, S. O.; Buffington, C. A. (2008). "Pinch-induced behavioral inhibition ('clipnosis') in domestic cats". Journal of Feline Medicine & Surgery. 10 (1): 82–7. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2007.10.008. PMID 18222719. S2CID 46156902. ^ Hart, Benjamin (December 2008). "Why do dogs and cats eat grass?". Veterinary Medicine. 103 (12): 648. ^ Li, Xia (July 2006). "Cats lack a sweet taste receptor". The Journal of Nutrition. 136 (7): 1932S–1934S. doi:10.1093/jn/136.7.1932s. PMC 2063449. PMID 16772462. ^ Macdonald, Rogers (1984). "Nutrition of the domestic cat, a mammalian carnivore". Annual Review of Nutrition. 4 (1): 521–562. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.4.1.521. PMID 6380542. ^ "What You Need To Do If Your Cat Not Eating Much But Acting Normal". Walk With Cat. 2019-09-26. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ Bradshaw, J. W. S., & Cook, S. E. (1996). Patterns of Pet Cat Behaviour at Feeding Occasions. Applied Animal Behavioral Science 47(1), 61-64. DOI: doi.org/10.1016/0168-1591(95)01011-4 ^ Izawa, Masako (1983). "Daily Activities of the Feral Cat Felis catus LINN.*". Retrieved 1 May 2023. ^ Piccione, Giuseppe; Marafioti, Simona; Giannetto, Claudia; Panzera, Michele; Fazio, Francesco (2013-07-01). "Daily rhythm of total activity pattern in domestic cats (Felis silvestris catus) maintained in two different housing conditions". Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 8 (4): 189–194. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2012.09.004. ISSN 1558-7878. ^ Frayne, Jennifer; Murray, Sarah Macdonald; Croney, Candace; Flickinger, Elizabeth; Edwards, Michelle; Shoveller, Anna Kate (2019). "The Behavioural Effects of Innovative Litter Developed to Attract Cats". Animals. 9 (9): 683. doi:10.3390/ani9090683. PMC 6770919. PMID 31540016. ^ "Socialization". Encyclopedia Britannica. October 18, 2018. ^ "Socialization". Dictionary.com. October 18, 2018. ^ a b c d Spotte, Stephen (2014). Free-Ranging Cats: Behaviour, Ecology, & Management. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. pp. 49–59. ISBN 978-1-118-88401-0. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Crowell-Davis, Sharon, L. (2007). "Cat Behaviour: Social Organization, Communication, & Development". The Welfare of Cats. Netherlands: Springer, Dordrecht. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ a b c d e f Bradshaw, John W. S. (1992). The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. Wallingford: CAB International. pp. 78, 198–200. ISBN 0-85198-715-X. ^ a b Alder, H.E. (1955). "Some Factors of Observational Learning". The Journal of Genetic Psychology. 86 (1): 159–177. doi:10.1080/00221325.1955.10532903. PMID 14354164. ProQuest 1297110751. ^ Caro, T. M. (1980). "Effects of the Mother, Object Play, and Adult Experience on Predation in Cats". Behavioral and Neural Biology. 29 (1): 29–51. doi:10.1016/S0163-1047(80)92456-5. PMID 7387584. ^ a b c d e f g h Leyhausen, Paul (1979). Cat Behaviour: The Predatory & Social Behaviour of Domestic & Wild Cats. New York, New York: Garland Publishing Inc. pp. 164–216, 227–231. ISBN 978-0-8240-7017-5. ^ a b Beadle, Muriel (1977). The Cat: History, Biology, and Behaviour. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 100–111. ISBN 978-0-671-22451-6. ^ "Bunting Behavior – Answers, Why, When & How of Cat Behavior Issues by Pam Johnson-Bennett". www.catbehaviorassociates.com. 2012-05-03. Retrieved 2018-12-03. ^ Takagi, Saho; Saito, Atsuko; Arahori, Minori; Chijiiwa, Hitomi; Koyasu, Hikari; Nagasawa, Miho; Kikusui, Takefumi; Fujita, Kazuo; Kuroshima, Hika (13 April 2022). "Cats learn the names of their friend cats in their daily lives". Scientific Reports. 12 (1): 6155. Bibcode:2022NatSR..12.6155T. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-10261-5. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 9007945. PMID 35418204. S2CID 248155872. ^ a b c Turner, Dennis C.; Bateson, Patrick (1988). The Domestic Cat: The Biology of its Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 112–113, 159–168. ISBN 978-0-521-35447-9. ^ a b c d e Bernstein, Penny L. (2007). "The Human-Cat Relationship". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 47–89. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ "Why Does My Cat Follow Me Everywhere In The House". Walk With Cat. 2019-10-03. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ a b c d Casey, Rachel; Bradshaw, John (November 2008). "The effects of additional socialisation for kittens in a rescue centre on their behaviour and suitability as a pet". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 114 (1–2): 196–205. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2008.01.003. ^ a b Heath, Sarah E. (2007). "Behaviour Problems and Welfare". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 91–107. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ Roetman, Philip; Kikillus, K. Heidy; Chiera, Belinda; Tindle, Hayley; Quinton, Gillian; Litchfield, Carla A. (2017-08-23). "The 'Feline Five': An exploration of personality in pet cats (Felis catus)". PLOS ONE. 12 (8): e0183455. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1283455L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0183455. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 5568325. PMID 28832622. ^ Herron, Meghan. "Environmental Enrichment for Indoor Cats" (PDF). Ohio State University. OSU. ^ "The Dangers of Strings, Ribbons, and Yarn for Cats". ^ "One Kitten or Two?". Archived from the original on 2018-06-21. Retrieved 2015-09-17. ^ Beaver, Bonnie (September 2004). "Fractious cats and feline aggression". Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 6 (1): 13–18. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2003.09.011. PMID 15123162. S2CID 525291. Bishko, Adriane. "What Your Cat's Body Language Is Saying". WebMD Pet. WebMD. Retrieved 1 December 2018. vteDomestic catsFelinology Anatomy Genetics Dwarf cat Kitten Odd-eyed cat Squitten Coat genetics Bicolor cat Black cat Calico cat Tabby cat Tortoiseshell cat Health Aging Declawing Diet dental health senior Vaccination Behavior Cat–dog relationship Catfight Catnip valerian Communication Meow Purr Kneading Intelligence Play and toys Righting reflex Senses Human–catinteraction Ailurophobia Cat cafés Cat killers Cat massage Cat meat Cat-scratch disease Cat show Cats in ancient Egypt Cultural depictions fictional Internet Feral cat Cats and Islam Lolcat National Cat Day Pet cat Puppy cat Working cat Bodega cat Farm cat Library cat Ship's cat Zoonosis Registries American Cat Fanciers Association Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana Canadian Cat Association Cat Aficionado Association Cat Fanciers' Association Fédération Internationale Féline Governing Council of the Cat Fancy New Zealand Cat Fancy Southern Africa Cat Council The International Cat Association World Cat Congress World Cat Federation Breeds(full list)(experimental)Fullydomestic Abyssinian American Curl American Shorthair Balinese Brazilian Shorthair British Shorthair Birman Bombay Burmese Burmilla California Spangled Chartreux Chinese Li Hua Colorpoint Shorthair Cornish Rex Cymric Devon Rex Donskoy Egyptian Mau European Shorthair Exotic Shorthair German Rex Himalayan Japanese Bobtail Javanese Khao Manee Korat Kurilian Bobtail Lykoi Maine Coon Manx Munchkin Neva Masquerade Norwegian Forest Ocicat Ojos Azules Oriental Shorthair Persian Peterbald Pixie-bob Ragdoll Ragamuffin Russian Blue Scottish Fold Selkirk Rex Siamese Siberian Singapura Snowshoe Somali Sphynx Thai Traditional Persian Tonkinese Toyger Turkish Angora Turkish Van Hybrid Bengal Chausie Highlander Savannah Serengeti Landraces Aegean Cyprus Domestic long-haired Domestic short-haired Kellas Sokoke Van Diseases anddisorders Acne Asthma Calicivirus Congenital sensorineural deafness Feline corneal sequestrum Flea Coccidia Heartworm Hepatic lipidosis Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Immunodeficiency virus Infectious peritonitis Leukemia virus Lower urinary tract disease Panleukopenia Giardiasis Polydactyly Rabies Ringworm Tritrichomonas foetus Roundworm Skin disorders Tick Toxoplasmosis Viral rhinotracheitis Cats by country Australia Canada Japan New Zealand United Kingdom United States Related List of individual cats List of oldest cats Cats in folklore Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cat_behavior&oldid=1177443160" Categories: Cat behaviorAnimal communicationEthologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from October 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from July 2012All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesCommons category link is on WikidataArticles containing video clips This page was last edited on 27 September 2023, at 16:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width 

Skip to Main Content Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Menu Find a pet Main menuFind a pet Find a pet Rehome a pet Rehome a pet How to rehome Rehome a horse Rehome a horse How to rehome a horse Foster an animal Foster an animal Horse fostering Advice for adopters Advice for adopters Advice and welfare Main menuAdvice and welfare Advice and welfare Pets Pets Dogs Cats Rabbits Horses Rodents Ferrets Exotic pets Ornamental Fish General Giving up a pet Pet bereavement Find or call a vet Pet theft Brachycephalic animals Lost and found Lab animals Lab animals Phasing out Are animal experiments necessary? Testing chemicals Medicines and vaccines Replacing research animals Reducing research animal suffering Primates and research Biotechnology Farm animals Farm animals Farm animals as pets Slaughter On-farm Live transport Pigs Laying hens Sheep Farmed fish Meat chickens Ducks Dairy cows Beef cattle Turkeys Farmed rabbits Foie Gras Worried about a farm animal? Bovine TB Litter Litter Fishing litter Alternatives to balloons and sky lanterns Single use plastics Sky lanterns Seasonal advice Seasonal advice Spring Summer Autumn Winter Floods Pets at Christmas Diseases Diseases Alabama rot Performing animals Performing animals Guidelines Report concerns FAQs The cost-of-living crisis The cost-of-living crisis Pet cost calculator Food bank Food bank donation point Dog behaviour care costs Wildlife friendly gardening Wildlife friendly gardening The RSPCA wildlife garden Wildlife Wildlife Foxes Squirrels Hedgehogs Otters Seals Bats Rats and mice Rabbits and Hares Find a wildlife rescue centre Wildlife deterrents Injured wild animals Badgers Snakes Deer Wildlife in captivity Wildlife laws Get involved Main menuGet involved Get involved Volunteer Volunteer What can I do? What's it like to volunteer with us? Volunteers' week Big Help Out Campaign Campaign Puppy trade Stun before slaughter Primates as pets Sentient beings Circuses Sanctuaries Farm Animals Better chicken Tougher sentencing Make Wales kinder for animals I'm a Celebrity Stop live exports Animal rehoming Fur Free Britain Gene editing Pets as prizes End the cage age Lab animal regulations Save our breath Join our campaign network Achievements Phase Out Lab Animals Fireworks Slaughterhouses Rabbit breeding End Sky Litter Ear cropping Vapes Better labels better choices End Breed Specific Legislation Act now for animals Donate Donate Leaving a legacy Current appeals Donate in memory Advice for donors Payroll Giving Unwanted items Gift Aid Sponsorship Philanthropy Win Win Raffle Lottery Fundraise Fundraise Virtual challenges At school Animal Hero Running Trekking Cycling Training hub Own place in an event Ideas and resources Fundraising pack Pay in your offline fundraising Swimming My Big Walkies #50MilesForAnimals Young people Young people Subscription Renewal Buttercup Farm 30DaysForAnimals Membership Membership Membership policy statement Events Events Local events One Fun Day Christmas Concert Howloween Great British Spring Clean Businesses Businesses Become a partner Our corporate partners Other ways companies can support What we do Main menuWhat we do What we do Strategy to 2030 Strategy to 2030 Getting justice for animals Ambitions End cruelty End cruelty Investigate cruelty Rescue animals Prevent suffering Prosecution Change the law Work internationally Care for animals Care for animals Rehabilitation Release Our wildlife centres Veterinary care Home for Life Financial assistance Education Education Children in school Young offenders At home Latest Latest News Our blog Publications The Dog Rescuers Jo Brand's Kitten Rescue Media contacts Adoptober RSPCA 2022 essay collection Animal Kindness Index 2022 Wilberforce Lecture Facts, figures and myths Who we are Who we are Governance Our branches Our executives High profile supporters Our history How we work How we work Our mission Policies RSPCA's rules Shop Main menuShop Shop Pet friendly holidays Pet friendly holidays Shop and donate Shop and donate Pet insurance Pet insurance Cat insurance Dog insurance Rabbit insurance Multi-pet insurance Product information FAQs Make a claim My RSPCA Main menu My RSPCA My account My account My pets My pets Sign in Sign in Your local RSPCA Your local RSPCA Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Share this... Get more animal welfare advice Sign up to receive our emails today. Get more pet care advice, hints and tips on helping wildlife, our latest news, rehoming success stories and more directly to your inbox. Sign up to emails today What does my cat's body language mean? Use our guide to help you understand how your cat is feeling Should I spay or neuter my cat? Make life easier and protect your kitten - get them done. The social needs of cats Find out more about the social needs of cats Environment Diet Behaviour Understanding cat behaviour Company Health and welfare Kittens Hidden How we help In 2022 we investigated and closed 63,563 complaints of animal cruelty Get in touch Find your local RSPCA Contact us Report cruelty Our charity Media centre Science RSPCA Assured Education Follow us Or sign up for email updates © RSPCA 2023. All rights reserved. The RSPCA helps animals in England and Wales. Registered charity no.219099. Terms and conditions Site map National privacy notice Accessibility Modern slavery Contact us Jobs 

Underwriting Toggle navigation Pet Insurance Plans Dog & Puppy Insurance Cat & Kitten Insurance Pet Wellness Plans Coverage Pet Insurance 101 How To Pick The Right Plan Pet Insurance Cost Why Pets Best Pet Insurance Comparison Reviews & Testimonials Direct Vet Pay 24/7 Emergency Vet Hotline Resources Blog New Dog Owner's Guide New Cat Owner's Guide Summer Pet Guide Senior Pet Owner's Guide Best Vet Near Me Pets Best Mobile App Frequently Asked Questions How To File a Claim After Filing a Claim CareCredit About Us The Pets Best Story Community Involvement Careers Contact Us Get a Quote Login × HOW CAN WE HELP? 6a - 7p Monday - Friday 6a - 2p Saturday Mountain Time PHONE 1-877-738-7237 FAX 1-866-777-1434 MAIL Pets Best 2323 S Vista Ave. Ste. 100 Boise, ID 83705 My Question Select Info/changes to my policy Purchasing a policy, adding a pet, or getting more info about pet insurance Info/changes to my billing My claim status, claim check, claim process, or claim form My appeal status, appeal process, or appeal form Other First Name Last Name Policy (optional) Email Me Call Me Phone Best Day Day Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Best Time Time 8:00 am 9:00 am 10:00 am 11:00 am 12:00 pm 1:00 pm 2:00 pm 3:00 pm 4:00 pm 5:00 pm 6:00 pm 7:00 pm Email Click here to text customer care Pet Insurance Blog Common Cat Behaviors Explained and What They Mean Common Cat Behaviors Explained and What They Mean Mar 31, 2021 | Dr. Chris Roth, DVM Cartoonist Jim Davis, the creator of “Garfield,” once said, “Way down deep, we’re all motivated by the same urges. Cats have the courage to live by them.” That may explain why cats act the way they do and are often seen as very independent. Perhaps our cats are trying to teach us a valuable lesson by acting in ways that they were born to act. This doesn’t mean our furry feline friends can’t learn to behave in ways that benefit the entire family. So, if your cat is exhibiting excessive grooming habits, destructive kneading or scratching, or is disruptive at night, there’s hope. In general, early interventions with behavior training, veterinary oversight, or a cat behavior specialist, can help turn around cat behavior issues. Normal Cat Behavior Cats, like people, have unique personalities and characteristics. Therefore, there is no definitive list of “normal” cat behavior. While there are many common feline behaviors, keep in mind that each cat is special and may act in ways that are slightly different due to their personality, environment, or mood. For example, the most common cat behaviors include purring, grooming, kneading, and climbing. But each cat will engage in these activities differently. Pay attention to your cat’s behavior and determine what is “normal” for your cat so you can be aware of unusual behavior that may require a trip to the vet. Cat Purring Most people consider purring to be a universal sign that a cat is happy and content. For the most part, cats will purr when they are comfortable and happy. Cats often purr when being pet, enjoying the sunshine, or sitting on your laptop computer as you try to work. Purring, however, can also be a sign of stress due to unfamiliar situations or surroundings. It can also be when your cat is sick or injured. When a cat purrs, the larynx’s vibrating cords create vibrations across the cat’s entire body that can be soothing in a stressful situation. If your cat is purring excessively or in situations where purring is not common, it could be a sign of illness or injury. Thoroughly examine your cat or take them to a veterinarian, especially if the cat is not eating, drinking, or otherwise acting “normal.” Feline Grooming Cats also typically spend a great deal of time grooming. For some cats, grooming can take up to 50 percent of their time. Grooming helps cats stay tidy, but their saliva also helps insulate their bodies and keep them warm. So, you may see your cat grooming more in cold weather. Each cat will have different grooming habits and patterns, so pay attention to your cat’s beauty regime. If grooming is excessive (overall or in a certain area) or causes loss of fur, you should bring your cat to the veterinarian for an examination. Damage from Your Cat’s Kneading Another common cat behavior is kneading. Cats are known to push their front paws in and out in a motion that resembles a baker kneading dough. In this case, however, the “dough” is a pillow, carpet, furniture, or a person’s chest or head. Experts are not certain why cats behave this way. Some believe it is residual behavior from nursing as a kitten, or simply a way to show contentment. Other experts point out that cats have glands in the pads of their paws, so perhaps this behavior is a way to mark their territory. If kneading is causing damage, make sure to keep your cat’s nails trimmed. If your cat is kneading you and causing pain, simply distract the cat by petting, playing with the paws, or giving a treat. Avoid scolding or punishing the cat for kneading because the behavior is instinctual. Climbing on Everything Cats generally like high places and are excellent climbers. This behavior is genetic since cats are natural predators. A higher vantage point gives them a better view of their surroundings. Another practical reason for seeking a comfy ledge is to hide, which can allow them to take advantage of the warmer air or settle down for a nice catnap without being disturbed. Interestingly, in a household of cats, the dominant cat usually occupies the highest perch. There are many types of cat perches that you can buy or make on your own, but make sure that the perch is safe and can hold the weight of your cat. If your cat enjoys climbing on high shelves or above the refrigerator and cabinets, make sure the area is clear of items that could hurt or trap your cat. And beware of falling objects. Destructive Cat Scratching Other cat behavior includes burying and scratching, which is another instinct in all cats. Some cats will paw at the area around their food dish to mimic burying, as well as covering their tracks after using the litter box. Cats will naturally scratch to keep nails clean and to mark territory. Or course, cats may want to scratch furniture or walls, so make sure to provide more acceptable options like a scratching post. Cats prefer to scratch textures that are appealing, so you can discourage a cat from scratching certain areas by applying double-sided tape or aluminum foil. With a bit of patience, you can direct your cat to scratch acceptable objects and minimize unwanted scratches in the household. Feline Curiosity Cats are also prone to curling up into a tight ball to sleep, which provides warmth and security. Similar behavior is referred to as “loafing around” when cats curl their paws under to form a shape that looks like a little loaf of bread. This is done not only to look cute, but to regulate body heat and conserve warmth. Some cat behavior is simply the result of curiosity. While it may seem that cats are trying to type on the computer or enjoy pushing objects off a table or shelf, this behavior is common in many cats simply as a form of play. Also, cats probably enjoy watching humans reacting to their mischievous antics. Again, pay attention to how your cat plays and take note if your cat’s behavior changes because there could be a medical reason for the change. Cat Temperament and Behavior All cat lovers want to develop a strong bond with their cats. But like people, some cats will naturally be more sociable than others. Cats are certainly capable of forming strong social bonds with humans and other cats, but not all cats will act the same. Kittens will learn social behavior from their mother, which includes how to control their bite and retract their claws. Normal play will involve the use of teeth and claws even as adults. Ideally, kittens will learn social skills from other cats, including how to interact with humans. Kittens learn by observing, imitating, and experimenting so it is essential not to remove a kitten from the litter too soon because they won’t be fully socialized. Other behavior that kittens learn include hunting (real and mock), night-time play, meowing, and other vocalizations. Cats are hunters by instinct, and domestic cats will often engage in behavior that is part hunting and part play. Outdoor cats may hone their real hunting skills while indoor cats will enjoy mock hunting with toys. Modifying Your Cat’s Night Time Behavior Historically, big wildcats are nocturnal, which can result in domestic cats displaying tremendous energy at night. It is not surprising to be awakened in the middle of the night by your cat running madly around the house, including your sleeping, lazy body. While this may be amusing at first, it is behavior that you can easily modify by playing with the cat before bedtime. You can also get another cat, but that could result in two cats running around the house madly. With some patience, however, you should be able to modify your cat’s schedule to allow you a good night’s sleep. Talkative Cats Kittens learn to meow to communicate with their mother. As they grow older, cats will learn to vocalize by howling, hissing, and growling to communicate with other cats. Most cats meow to communicate with humans, and obviously, some cats will be more talkative than others. There are various reasons why a cat will meow, such as hunger, loneliness, or merely a way to say hello. Excessive meowing can indicate pain or injury, so always determine why a cat is meowing. Avoid punishing a cat from meowing because, in most cases, the cat is trying to communicate to you. How to Socialize Your Cat While most cats are loving and easily become a member of the family, some cats will require more time to feel completely comfortable in your home. Some cats are naturally shy, while others may have a history of trauma. So remember to be patient when introducing yourself to a new cat and follow these tips to socialize your cat properly: be patient and compassionate start with small places, so your cat can become familiar witha small space at first keep things quiet and use a soft voice because cats have very sensitive hearing comfort your cat with food let the cat approach you and set the pace of socialization It’s important not to get discouraged or give up. Also, don’t blame yourself or the cat. Some cats will need more work than others, and some cats will always be shy and avoid a lot of interaction with humans. Aggressive Cat Behavior Of course, it is important to be aware of signs of aggression. An aggressive cat can be dangerous in the household and cause painful scratches or bites that can lead to infection or disease. Cats will act aggressively towards humans when they are afraid or believe they are in danger. There are common behaviors that signal aggression, including a stiff, straight-legged upright stance,; stiffened rear legs with head lowered,; direct stare, as well as growling or hissing. Cats will often act aggressively when they are injured or require medical attention. If a cat is acting aggressively, you should bring the cat to a pet care professional to determine if there is a medical cause for the aggression. If there is no medical condition, then you should consider ways to socialize your cat further. While each cat will have a different personality and temperament, cat behavior specialists and cat behavior training can assist you and your cat in behavior changes. Cats are often admired for being independent, which means that some cats will prefer not to be pet, carried, or have too much interaction with people. Like people, cats can be in the mood to be playful, or they might want to be alone. Recognize and respect the differences in each cat’s\ unique personalities and remember that cats will have different moods. Cats are wonderful pets and valuable additions to the family. Ensure you and your cat are happy by being patient and allowing your cat to behave as naturally as possible. With a little patience and some help from the tips described, you can ensure your cat is well behaved and happy in your home. No matter your cat’s behavior, knowing that you don’t have to worry about your pet’s unexpected veterinary costs can take a load off of your mind and lets you focus solely on the well-being of your feline family member. Cover your cat’s health needs with a good pet insurance policy, and you’ll have one less aggravation to worry about. Protect your loved ones with Pet Insurance! Get a Quote LegalUnderwriters & LicensingApplication AgreementPrivacy AgreementText Policy AlertsState Terms & ConditionsClaim Payment CalculationAccessibility StatementFor PartnersAgent LoginVeterinariansAffiliatesEmployers and BrokersShelter and RescueAPIStay ConnectedFacebookInstagramTwitterYouTubePinterestPet eCardsGet In TouchContactCareersMedia & Press * Select a plan that reimburses 70%, 80%, or 90% of the cost of eligible treatment. Limited to covered expenses.This content is subject to change without notice and offered for informational use only. You are urged to consult with your individual medical providers with respect to any information presented. Pets Best and any of its affiliates, including CareCredit, (collectively, “Synchrony”) makes no representations or warranties regarding this content and accept no liability for any loss or harm arising from the use of the information provided. Your receipt of this material and/or participation in this presentation constitutes your acceptance of these terms and conditions.As a convenience to you, the Issuer may provide, on the Site, links to web sites operated by other entities. If you click these links, you will leave the Site. If you decide to visit any linked site, you do so at your own risk and it is your responsibility to take all protective measures to guard against viruses or other destructive elements. The Issuer makes no warranty or representation regarding, and does not endorse, any linked web sites or the information appearing thereon or any of the products or services described thereon. Links do not imply that the Issuer or the Site sponsors, endorses, is affiliated or associated with, or is legally authorized to use any trademark, trade name, logo or copyright symbol displayed in or accessible through the links, or that any linked site is authorized to use any trademark, trade name, logo or copyright symbol of the Issuer or any of its affiliates or subsidiaries.Pet insurance coverage offered and administered by Pets Best Insurance Services, LLC is underwritten by American Pet Insurance Company, a New York insurance company headquartered at 6100 4th Ave. S. Suite 200 Seattle, WA 98108, or Independence American Insurance Company, a Delaware insurance company located at 11333 N. Scottsdale Rd, Ste. 160, Scottsdale, AZ 85254. Pets Best Insurance Services, LLC (CA agency #0F37530) is a licensed insurance agency located at 10840 Ballantyne Commons Parkway, Charlotte, NC 28277. Each insurer has sole financial responsibility for its own products. Please refer to your declarations page to determine the underwriter for your policy. Terms and conditions apply. See your policy for details. Pets Best is a Synchrony Health and Wellness solution.Copyright © 2005-. Pets Best Insurance Services, LLC. 

Skip to Main Content Close Subtotal: $0 Pay in full or in 4 interest-free installments of $0 with ShopPay Proceed to Checkout Shipping Immediately Backordered You might also like: Really Great Cat Litter - $29 Size 1 month supply 3 months supply Add to cart Cove Litter Box - $199 Style Cove + Shelter Cove (doesn't include high walls) Add to cart Your cart is empty Close Search website Search Free US shipping on orders $195+ Open Menu tuft + paw Homepage Shop Cat Furniture Shop Cat Litter Log in Search website Open Cart Open Cart Close Shop Cat Furniture Shop Cat Litter Log in Search website Emails for cat people. You are already subscribed! Email Address Join Be the first person to hear about sales, new product announcements, and more. Email us [email protected] Facebook Instagram Pinterest Youtube Now Reading: The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language Share: Share article on Facebook Share article on Twitter Share article on Pinterest Previous Article Next Article Home Cat Education Center The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language End litter tracking TODAY with 25% OFF Really Great Cat Litter ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ tuft + paw's flushable cat litter formula is the lowest-tracking cat litter you'll ever use. That's because the large, dust-free pellets don't get stuck in your cat's toe beans. Every cat (and cat parent) deserves a clean home, so we made a discount code for you to use on your first order 🙂 Use code CLEANHOME for 25% off Cats, like human-beings, reveal their inner states through their body language. At tuft + paw, we spend a ton of time researching cats in order to design our cat furniture. We have both a cat behaviorist and a veterinarian on our team, so we have a lot of insight into why cats behave a certain way. For this guide, we sat down with Feline Behavior Expert Marci Koski to figure out exactly how to tell the difference between a cat that’s anxious, fearful, or angry and one that’s friendly and comfortable. We’ll also share some fun stories that will help you understand some common cat body language quirks. The first step in reading a cat's body language is understanding the context. There are many physical cues of a cat's mood, but their meaning can vary depending on the context. For example, one of the most reliable signs of a confident cat is a tail that’s lifted vertically, high in the air. Most of the time, this tail position indicates that the cat feels comfortable and open to interaction. However, in certain contexts – like warding off a strange cat in his own territory – a high tail can also indicate a willingness to attack. The high tail can represent a confident cat or a potentially aggressive cat depending on the scenario. So, when it comes to reading cat body language, the key is to pay attention not only to physical cues, but also the situation in which they take place, which is the approach we'll be following in this guide. When considering context, it’s important to try to see things from your cat’s perspective. People often approach cats with good intentions, get scratched or bitten, and then blame the cat for being mean-tempered. What’s missing is an assessment of how the cat might have perceived the gesture. One should always consider whether the situation feels safe for the cat or might be causing them fear or anxiety. A dark, confined environment that a cat can’t easily escape from produces more stress than a wide open comfortable room where surroundings can be seen, which is why cats usually love relaxing on high open perches. Sprout Modern Cat Tower by tuft + paw - Shop Here Credit: @jessoliverbagett A quality cat tower (check out our guide to the best cat trees) is a great way to provide a multi-purpose space for your cat to observe, relax, play, and withdraw when they're feeling overwhelmed. If the cat is familiar with everyone in the environment and also has a personal spot they know they can retreat to, a cat will likely feel safer and you can assume more comfort. When gauging a cat’s mood, take in the big picture first. All sensory inputs – sights, sounds, smells – should be taken into account to provide the most accurate idea of how a cat might feel. If you’re still unsure, you can look to individual components of the cat’s body language and put the pieces together to figure out what your cat might be feeling. Without any further ado, let’s look at the most significant component of a cat’s body language: posture. Posture/Body Position: Open or Closed? It’s helpful to remember that as animals, cats evolved as both predators and prey. When cats encounter threatening circumstances, they feel like prey and become scared. When scared, cats are likely to try and protect their body as much as possible by scrunching up into a small, less exposed shape. A tense, ball-like posture can also be a sign that your cat is in pain. When a cat stretches out, they’re voluntarily exposing themselves – this shows that they don’t feel threatened. On the other hand, a ball-shaped cat is usually not feeling open to advances. A cat that’s feeling anxious or worried might also crouch down, low to the ground. If they stop and freeze when they see you, you can be sure they’re not feeling comfortable. Tip: If you notice your cat is frequently assuming closed postures (e.g. when strangers come over) but doesn't have a place they can retreat to that still allows them to see the room, consider adding some high perches in your home. We've already mentioned cat trees, but another great option is a window hammock or wall-mounted shelf. Cloud Nine Window Hammock by tuft + paw - Shop Here Credit: @stormy_thebritish There’s a big difference, however, between a cat stretching out in relaxation and a cat making itself bigger as a form of defense. When a cat is fearful or angry to the point of being willing to fight, they'll often make themselves as big as possible in various ways. A classic example is when a cat puts its back all the way up and stands sideways to the threat – a cat with their back arched in this position is telling you they're terrified. When a cat’s back is arched, their hair often stands up too. (The term for hair standing up in this way is piloerection.) Both behaviors make the cat look bigger and more intimidating. A cat exhibiting these behaviors might be ready to stand their ground and fight. Body orientation also important to consider. Cats forecast their intentions and next moves by pointing their body in the direction they are likely to go. If a cat is standing sideways to you, they might be feeling shy and considering escape. With a sideways body position, the cat has the advantage of being able to take off fast if a chase occurs. The crouched-down body position enables the cat to spring off and start running quickly, should they feel the need. If a cat is pointing their body and head toward you, they may be interested in you and receptive to your advances. A cat who faces away from you may not necessarily be disinterested, however – their letting their guard down around you can also signal comfort and willing to be touched – so get a feel for the context. A Cat On Its Back – a.k.a. “the Venus Cat Trap” Remember, no single sign or indicator of body language is guaranteed, so caution when interacting with cats is usually the best policy. For proof of this, you can ask anyone that’s ever been a victim of the Venus Cat Trap. Many people, after they learn that a cat exposing itself feels comfortable, may see a cat with its belly up and think that it’s safe to rub or pet the cat’s belly. The exposed belly is a sign of comfort and trust, but it is not necessarily an invitation for a belly rub. Many people have touched a cat’s stomach only to have its owner instantly seize-up, latching onto their hand with claws and teeth. The Venus Cat Trap can be avoided with some care and sensitivity to context. In one context, a cat laying on its back and exposing its belly is expressing relaxation, trust, and security. In a different context, the cat is indicating that it’s ready to fight off an aggressor, since this position allows for the claws to be ready and defensively effective. Dylan often appears relaxed with his belly exposed, but don’t be fooled! If you go to pet his stomach, you’ll become his prey very quickly. Kip Cat Cushion by tuft + paw - Shop Here Credit: @buckminsterscatcafe Benny, on the other hand, loves tummy rubs. Kip Cat Cushion by tuft + paw - Shop Here Credit: @m0ldypeach The more you know about a cat’s personality, the more you can understand their perspective, and so the context of the situation. Knowing the different preferences of Dylan and Benny, for example, will help you avoid the Venus Cat Trap. The Tail: A Barometer of Confidence A cat’s tail is one of the first places to look for signs of their mood. As mentioned earlier, a high, vertical tail indicates a cat that’s feeling confident, comfortable, happy, and friendly, and a low tail indicates a cat that’s feeling fearful or anxious. It’s helpful to think about the shape a cat is making and how it relates to the overall situation. A very fearful cat might not only keep its tail down, but tuck it between its legs; this is done to present a target that’s as small as possible to aggressors. And a high, puffed-out tail might indicate a cat trying to make itself bigger to intimidate potential foes. Why do cats flick their tails? Two other actions a cat’s tail can exhibit are vibration and flicking. When a cat’s tail quivers, it can be a sign of happy excitement. This may appear similar to the vibrating movement a cat’s tail makes before it spray-marks something with urine. Again, however, context is everything – if a cat greets you with this gesture she is excited to see you. Flicking, on the other hand, can be a sign of agitation or alertness. For example, Abbey, who can be moody and sometimes even a Venus Cat Trap, will sometimes show her lack of receptivity by flicking her tail. When she receives attention and pets, she’ll often go from excited and happy to simply tolerant and then to upset. Her body language gives clues at each stage, and when she flicks her tail, it’s time to back off. Tail flicking doesn't always indicate agitation though. Cats who are engaged in hunting behaviors (whether real or play) will often flick their tails as they watch their prey. If you're using an exciting cat toy and your cat is going crazy for it, chances are there's some tail flicking going on before they pounce. In this situation, tail flicking is a sign of stimulation and alertness. Ears: For Hearing and for Showing Ear position is another place to look for clues about a cat’s mood. Normal, forward ears indicate a cat that’s feeling confident, relaxed, or engaged. As always, however, context is essential for understanding. When a cat’s ears stand straight up, the cat is increasing their exposure, and you may be fooled into thinking it’s at ease; instead, sometimes the high, erect ear position indicates alertness or a desire to play. A cat with ears turned back is usually a good sign that a cat is feeling angry or fearful When a cat protects their ears by flattening them to the side, you can almost always be sure that they’re feeling afraid. (Some people will refer to ears in this position as “airplane ears.”) Dharma is a cat that likes to hang out in her owner’s closet. A former feral cat, Dharma is now more comfortable and confident. She still needs a place in which she can rest and hide from the world, though, and she chooses the closet. When new people come looking for her in the closet, she can feel threatened. When a person enters the closet, Dharma makes herself as small as possible, and that includes her ears. Dharma’s ears get so flat on her head, they look like they’ve been plastered there. Eyes: The Windows to the Mood A cat’s posture, tail, and ears will probably tell you what you need to know, but if you’re still unsure, take a look at their eyes. When a cat trusts you and feels comfortable around you, they might blink at you slowly. A slowly blinking cat is usually a comfortable one. A cat’s pupils are another good way to tell how relaxed or stimulated it is. Relaxed eyes usually belong on a cat that’s feeling comfortable. When a cat’s pupils are large and dilated, that means it’s stimulated. Stimulation is not necessarily good or bad. A cat that’s feeling playful will often have dilated pupils. However, dilated pupils can also indicate fear, excitement, or anger. Consider the context to decide. The famous cat slow blink Cats blink slowly to show affection and relaxation. If a cat blinks slowly at you, they are not threatened by you – in fact, they trust you. To bond with a cat that blinks slowly at you, you can return their gesture by blinking slowly back at them. This is a great way to communicate with your cats. Whiskers If you’ve taken in all the other signs and you still want more information, check out a cat’s whiskers. Compared to a cat’s posture, tail, ears, and eyes, the whiskers aren’t going to tell you as much, but they may provide a helpful hint. Fearful cats bring the whiskers close to the face This action is yet another example of a fearful cat’s tendency to try and make itself smaller. Confident cats, by contrast, might push their whiskers forward. Vocalization: Cat Noises Although not “body language” per se, the noises a cat makes – their vocalizations – are a cat’s most overt ways of telling you its feelings. What makes a cat purr? Most people understand that purring is a good sign, but, in fact, like most other indicators, it’s not guaranteed. Purring is a sign of pleasure – it’s the most obvious way to tell when a cat is happy. However, cats may also purr when they’re in pain! Many veterinarians report that cats purr when they’re injured or feeling sick. The Fear/Aggression Vocalization Series When a cat wants you to understand that they’re feeling threatened, they may go through a series of vocalizations, increasing in intensity as their discomfort increases. First comes the growl. A growling cat is warning you to back off. Next is the hiss: Why do cats hiss? Hissing indicates that a cat is feeling threatened and may be getting ready to fight or flee; hissing is also a very effective way of showing a potential aggressor that the cat is armed with sharp fangs. The yowl usually comes after the hiss. Finally, a cat that’s shrieking feels that they’re out of options and is about to make their stand or retreat. Chirping and Chattering – What Does it Mean? Chirping and chattering are two vocalizations that are expressed for the same reason. A cat will chirp and chatter if there is potential prey nearby that it cannot attack. For example, if your cat is chirping at the window, they may see a bug that they would love to capture – but that is safe behind a screen. Chirping and chattering indicate excitement tempered by frustration. Puff Modern Cat Bed by tuft + paw - Shop Here What is trilling? Trilling sounds a bit like purring but has a much higher pitch - almost like a bell on a bicycle. Mother cats trill to communicate with their kittens. When a cat trills, it’s probably feeling friendly and familial. Cats often trill to their owners to greet them. Why is my cat constantly meowing? Meowing is one of the most ambiguous types of cat vocalizations because a cat meows for many reasons. Meowing could mean almost anything, from hunger to simple chattiness. Like most other body language signs and behaviors that cats exhibit, meowing should be analyzed as a part of the cat’s larger context. Constant meowing, however, may indicate that something is wrong. If a cat won’t stop meowing and seems to be in pain, it’s time for a trip to the vet. If they meow every day, even after eating, maybe your cat is just chatty – some cats, and breeds, are more vocal than others. Putting It All Together Cats have earned a reputation for being hard to read, but it’s not their fault – they just communicate differently than humans. With their posture, tails, ears, eyes, whiskers, and vocalizations, they’ll tell you whether they’re comfortable or not. The main takeaway is that a cat’s body language and behaviors should be looked at as a part of single big picture. By using the context of the entire situation, trying to see the situation from the cat’s point of view, and looking for subtle cues in body language, you’ll have an excellent chance at understanding your feline friends. Suggested Reading Why Is My Cat Going Outside the Litter Box? How to Choose the Right Litter 5 Best Non-Tracking Cat Litters 5 Best Natural Cat Litters 10 Best Cat Trees Cove: The Modern Litter Box We wanted to share an endorsement for our brand new Cove litter box. Cove is a simple, beautiful litter box with an integrated scoop, dustpan, and handbrush. Built by designers, engineers, and cat behaviorists and made from recycled plastics that are completely toxin-free. Visit the Cove page for more details on how you can get your hands on one. More details can be found here > p.s. Have you tried Really Great Cat Litter? Our flushable formula is 99% dust-free, low tracking, ultra absorbent, clumping, and eliminates odor on the spot. Liked what you read? Share us on: Share article on Facebook Share article on Twitter Share article on Pinterest About tuft + paw We're a modern brand for people who love cats. Our team includes cat behaviorists, veterinarians, industrial designers, and engineers. Our goal is to improve the quality of cat education and cat products. Search Search Community Forums Here at tuft + paw, we're cat experts. Ask our cat behaviorist and vet anything about cats and we'll get back to you within a few days. Visit Forum Article has 14 comments Leave a comment Name Email Comment Post comment All comments are moderated before being published. Comment written by Siena Bauer Comment published on September 07, 2023 Thanks so much!!!! My cat Wolfy can be very hard to read 😹. He uses the Venus cat trap A LOT. thanks again!! Comment written by Susie Comment published on September 07, 2023 Does anyone else’s cat ever puff up their fur – piloerection, sideways stance, dilated pupils, but in the midst of PLAYING? Like, she will initiate it, while we are all sitting around by the back door, and she’ll have a crazy 5 minutes running back and forth to the open door, puffed right up and we have a game where we now imitate her and stand side on with our arms out and walk like a crab and with wide eyes and she loves it. She is 100% playing and having a crazy burst of activity before flopping down again to nap. She runs back and forth to the door to get your attention and to get you to join in, there is no way she feels threatened by us in those circumstances! But I can’t find any sources on the internet that suggest it’s playful, but I know my cat!! Maybe she’s just a weird one, even for a cat! Comment written by Connor Hobart Comment published on April 06, 2020 Thanks for this article, it was really helpful to me! Comment written by Sharon Comment published on April 06, 2020 We have a male neutered cat. When he gets in my lap he will rub his head on me, he may lick my cheek, but then he bites my chin. Is biting like that a positive behavior on his part, or not. Comment written by Gloria May Comment published on April 06, 2020 My cat usually lays on either side when he stretches out. Lately he mostly hunkers down. He maintains a decent appetite but I’m afraid he isn’t comfortable, perhaps an internal problem. Comment written by Erin Comment published on April 06, 2020 This really helped me with body language of a cat for my project thanks you😊 Comment written by Mike Comment published on April 06, 2020 Great guide! Comment written by Robert Comment published on April 06, 2020 Would like to share that I believe I have read my cats response to satisfying an itch he feels as him licking his paw. The itch is probably a minor skin condition as the vet found nothing but any time I touch his back he licks his paw….even while eating !! Comment written by SilverStream Comment published on April 06, 2020 i had to randomly stop reading because of a flee on my cts face i dont think she knew she wsnt very happy about Comment written by Jason Comment published on April 06, 2020 Great article on cat body language. Really works. Thank you. Comment written by Tommy Comment published on September 30, 2019 I have one adult cat, and five 4 month old kittens; the five kittens were born feral. All six felines love their bellies rubbed! Comment written by clare Comment published on September 30, 2019 Black Beauty was sitting in a prime cat spot, on a table in front of the bedroom window. When I spoke lovey talk to her she yawned a few times. Wat does yawning mean? Comment written by Anushka Comment published on September 30, 2019 This really helped me to figure out how my newly-adopted cat felt like. Comment written by Miumiu Comment published on June 16, 2019 Thanks for sharing such a completed guide from facial behaviors to body language. I learn more about kitties although I am a mother of a cat for 2 years. Especially, I don’t know why my cat doesn’t allow me touching his opened belly until I read “the Venus Cat Trap” in this post! I think he is dependent enough to stay alone for 3 days as he always refuses my petting. However, last weeks, I left home 3 days for errands after making all preparation. I checked out the camera record every night and found that he meowed constantly, scratched the door of my bedroom, and roamed around the house anxiously. When I came home, he was very clingy and excited. I think he might have a little separation anxiety. I intend to raise one more cat as a companion for the elder one. This is a great way to treat separation anxiety I saw. Also, my friends said her two cats spend their time chasing and playing each other, never have separation anxiety! Related Guides 7 Best Cat Scratching Posts of 2023 Cats have a natural instinct to scratch, and if you want to save your furnitu... How to Stop Your Cat From Scratching the Carpet We all love cats, but their instinct to scratch can sometimes lead to frustra... 5 Best Modern Cat Scratching Posts in 2023 A scratching post is an essential outlet for your cat’s natural scratching in... We send emails for cat people. Receive emails on cat education, new product announcements and more. Enter your email Join the Club Facebook Instagram Pinterest Youtube Our Story Cat Education Center Privacy Policy Partners Careers Shipping & Returns Contact Community Forums Facebook Instagram Pinterest Youtube Tiktok Join our VIP cat lovers club You are already subscribed! Join 

Skip navigation Free Quote Pet Insurance Back Pet Insurance Pet Insurance Our Plans Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Puppy Insurance Kitten Insurance Plans What's Covered Accident-Only Coverage Preventive Care Coverage Behavioral Coverage Pre-existing Conditions Dental Coverage How It Works Back How It Works How Pet Insurance Works Pet Insurance Basics & Common Questions How Claims & Reimbursement Work Why Us Back Why Us Why Choose Us Compare Our Coverage Our Advantages Reviews About Us Resources Back Resources Pet Parent Resources View All Resources Insurance Pet Health Pet Care Pet Lifestyle Learn About Breeds Other Behavior Issues Car Safety Login Underwriting Policy Terms Contact Us Submit a Claim Underwriting Policy Terms Contact Us Submit a Claim Login Pet Insurance Pet Insurance Our Plans Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Puppy Insurance Kitten Insurance Plans What's Covered Accident-Only Coverage Preventive Care Coverage Behavioral Coverage Pre-existing Conditions Dental Coverage How It Works How Pet Insurance Works Pet Insurance Basics & Common Questions How Claims & Reimbursement Work Why Us Why Choose Us Compare Our Coverage Our Advantages Reviews About Us Resources Pet Parent Resources View All Resources Insurance Pet Health Pet Care Pet Lifestyle Learn About Breeds Other Behavior Issues Car Safety Free Quote Pet Parent Resources 14 Weird Cat Behaviors Explained 14 Weird Cat Behaviors Explained Post by: Dr. Wendy Hauser (opens new window) Cats make wonderful companions, but they can be curious critters. They like to bump their heads against us, sleep in tight boxes, knead our laps, and engage in all sorts of weird behaviors. What do these behaviors mean and when should you seek help from your veterinarian? 1. Bouncing Off the Walls Cats and especially kittens can be very playful and energetic. Sometimes they expel all that energy by darting from room to room, jumping up and down on the furniture, and going a little crazy. This kind of behavior can also be a reaction to catnip, which can make cats act goofy for short periods of time. All that vigorous activity is normal, but it can lead to injuries. It’s helpful to look around your house and make sure your cat’s area is as safe as possible. For instance, put away things that could get knocked over and keep windows closed. Cats who fall out of windows can suffer from high-rise syndrome, which are injuries that can include: a broken jaw, fractured ribs, and other issues. If this behavior is disrupting your household, you should find ways to help channel your cat’s energy. Make time to play games like chase to wear them out and provide them with interactive toys they can enjoy on their own. If you’re at your wit’s end, talk with your veterinarian. 2. Head Bumping When your cat bop, bop, bops you with their head, they’re saying, “I love you!” They’re also letting everyone know that you belong to them. Cats have pheromones in their cheek areas that mark you as their possession. But don’t worry if your cat doesn’t headbutt you. There are lots of other ways cats show their love. 3. Chattering Ever hear your cat chattering while watching the birds flying around the yard? That sound comes from their excitement at seeing potential prey combined with the frustration of not being able to get at them. Cats can also make other weird noises like chirping, yowling, and hacking. 4. Chewing Weird Things Some cats chew on odd things, like wool blankets, socks, plastic bags, or rubber bands. This behavior can be due to boredom, anxiety, or illness. It can also occur in cats who were weaned too early and feel the urge to “nurse” on soft items, like stuffed animals or blankets. This habit is dangerous since it can cause choking, intestinal blockages, and other problems. If your cat is chewing on inedible things, you should visit your veterinarian to figure out the cause and best course of treatment. If your cat swallows an object, an ASPCA Pet Health Insurance plan can help you cover the costs of care. Get a quote now. 5. Napping in Tight Places Cats love to slip into small spaces like boxes, dresser drawers, bathroom cabinets, or closet corners where they feel cozy and secure. They may even prefer these places to a comfy pet bed. This behavior can be traced back to their wildcat ancestors who would sleep safely hidden away to help avoid predators. 6. Giving Gifts Cats are infamous for leaving us unwanted gifts, such as dead mice or birds. This is actually their way of thanking us for all we do for them. While you should feel honored your cat wanted to share their spoils with you, you should avoid making a big deal about it. Don’t scold your cat for this normal behavior and certainly don’t praise them or you could end up with more gifts. While it won’t stop your cat from finding mice or other wildlife that get indoors, you can help prevent gift giving by keeping your cat inside at all times as recommended by our strategic partner the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals® (ASPCA®). This also protects your cat from contagious diseases and parasites. 7. Ignoring You If your cat’s ignoring you, it’s probably not because of anything you did. Our notoriously independent cats need a little time to themselves now and then. It’s a good idea to leave your cat alone when they are acting this way. Don’t worry—they’ll come seek you out for some attention when they want it. 8. Kneading Why do cats knead things with their paws? It may go back to their kitten days when they would press on their mommy’s tummy to stimulate milk flow. They might also do it simply because they’re feeling relaxed and content. Kneading shouldn’t be a problem unless your cat’s claws are digging into your thighs. In this case, it might be time to get out the nail clippers and safely trim them down. 9. Knocking Things Over It can be startling and frustrating when your cat shoves a book off your nightstand or pushes over a framed picture, but this is normal behavior. Cats have sensitive paws and like to swat things around to check them out. This is something they do with their prey too. Cats also knock things down to get our attention. It is best to ignore your cat when they are engaging in this activity, or you might reinforce the behavior. You should also put valuable or breakable objects out of paw’s reach. Have a dog at home? Check out these tips on managing common dog behavior problems. 10. Nibbling on Plants Cats nibble on plants for lots of different reasons. It might be because their tummy is upset, they find it comforting, they are curious, or they want to get your attention. Of course, this can be a problem if they chew on harmful plants, like lilies or daffodils. If you want to have plants in your home, make sure they are safe for cats. You should also be careful where you place them. Cats can knock over potted plants, which can result in injuries as well as a big mess. In addition, potting soil can contain parasite eggs. Keep cats out of the soil or ask your gardening store about sterilized soil. 11. Pooping Outside the Box It’s not pleasant when a cat starts going outside of the litter box. If this is happening in your home, you should try to figure out the cause. Make sure the litter box is clean, easily accessible, and in a semi-private space. You should also have an adequate number of litter boxes, which is one per cat plus an additional one. So, if you have two cats, you should have three litter boxes. You can try out a variety of boxes (covered, uncovered, different heights) to see what your cat prefers. If you have older cats, they might have trouble going up and down the stairs or getting into litter boxes with high sides. Try placing a litter box on the floor where your cat lives and purchase one they can get in and out of easily. Litter box issues can also be caused by illnesses, such as a urinary tract infection. If you suspect a medical issue or if you’re having trouble solving the problem, you should talk with your veterinarian. Get the scoop on cat poop, including more tips on keeping your cat from going outside the box. 12. Sipping from the Faucet Some cats like to drink water straight from the tap. They’ll jump up into the sink and wait for you to switch on the faucet. This behavior might come from their wildcat ancestors. In the great outdoors, it is safer to drink running water rather than from a stagnant source, which is more likely to contain bacteria and other contaminants. If you don’t mind your cat taking an occasional sip from the faucet, you don’t need to worry. However, if they become too needy with their requests to turn on the faucet, you can try setting up a pet fountain that runs continuously for them to enjoy. 13. Sleeping on Your Laptop With so many soft and comfy places to rest, why does your cat plunk down on your hard laptop? It could be because it is nice and warm after you’ve used it for awhile. Or maybe they’ve figured out this is a good way to get your attention. Cats can be very clever! 14. Staying Up All Night Some cats seem to sleep all day and play all night. This might be because they don’t have enough to do during the day. It can also be a habit they retained from their ancestors who liked to hunt in low light to take advantage of their keen eyesight. While this behavior is normal, it can be disruptive to everyone else who is trying to get a good night’s sleep. If your cat is too active at night, make sure they have interactive toys to play with during the day. Rotate their toys to keep them new and exciting. You can also offer your cat a small meal before bedtime to help make them sleepy. If your cat is very vocal or sounds like they are in pain at night, you should visit your veterinarian. Getting Help for Your Cat While some weird cat behaviors are silly or endearing, others that like staying up all night or going outside the litter box can be problematic. While there are things you can do to try to address common behavior issues at home, you should talk to your veterinarian if you have any questions or concerns. Remember that diagnosis and treatment for behavioral conditions can be covered if you have an ASPCA Pet Health Insurance plan. Get a quote now. RELATED ARTICLES Weird Noises Pets Make, and What They Mean Snort! Cough! Chirp! Honk! Why on earth do our pets make these kinds of sounds and what do they mean? READ MORE > Poison Safety Tips Every Pet Parent Needs to Know Their curious nature can get pets into stuff they shouldn't, such as food or plants that can be toxic if ingested. Do you know what to do in case of a poisoning emergency, what signs to look for or steps you can take to prevent a crisis? READ MORE > Caring For Your Cat’s Fur Learn how to care for your cat’s unique coat type. From longhair and shorthair to curly hair and hairless, each breed has some of their own care-taking needs. READ MORE > Find Articles Pet Parent Resources Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Browse Categories Health Lifestyle Insurance Care Cat Breeds Dog Breeds mainImage: https://www.aspcapetinsurance.com/media/2478/14-weird-cat-behaviors-explained.jpg title: 14 Weird Cat Behaviors Explained url: /resources/14-weird-cat-behaviors-explained/ author: Dr. Wendy Hauser category Care Sub category Cat Pet Insurance Our Plans Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Free Quote About Us Contact Us Our Company Careers Reviews Media Center Partners Veterinarians Employers Associations Benefit Brokers Members Mobile App Submit a Claim Customer Login Top Questions Resources Pet Dangers Vet Finder Compare Resource Center More Info Underwriting Privacy Policy Licensing Web Accessibility Mobile T&Cs Site Map Get a free quote to cover your four-legged family. Error: please correct the following issues Pet's name cannot be blank. Pet's name must only be letters and numbers. Your Pet's Name Go! Get Social With Us Pet Insurance Get a Quote Research & Compare About Us Veterinarians Groups Customer Login My Pet Insurance App Web Accessibility Site Map (opens new window) Notice to California Residents Notice to Maine Residents **Pre-existing conditions are not covered. Waiting periods, annual deductible, co-insurance, benefit limits and exclusions may apply. For all terms and conditions visit www.aspcapetinsurance.com/terms. Preventive Care coverage reimbursements are based on a schedule. Complete Coverage℠ reimbursements are based on the invoice. Products, schedules, and rates may vary and are subject to change. Discounts may vary and are subject to change. More information available at checkout. Insurance products are underwritten by either Independence American Insurance Company (NAIC #26581. A Delaware insurance company located at 11333 N. Scottsdale Rd, Ste. 160, Scottsdale, AZ 85254), or United States Fire Insurance Company (NAIC #21113. Morristown, NJ). Please refer to your policy forms to determine the underwriter for your policy. Insurance is produced by PTZ Insurance Agency, Ltd. (NPN: 5328528. Domiciled in Illinois with offices at 1208 Massillon Road, Suite G200, Akron, Ohio 44306). (California residents only: PTZ Insurance Agency, Ltd., d.b.a PIA Insurance Agency, Ltd. CA license #0E36937). The ASPCA® is not an insurer and is not engaged in the business of insurance. Through a licensing agreement, the ASPCA receives a royalty fee that is in exchange for use of the ASPCA’s marks and is not a charitable contribution. © Copyright 2023, PTZ Insurance Agency, Ltd. ASPCA Logo, © Copyright 2023, ASPCA. All Rights Reserved 

Skip to main content Open Search Bar Close Search Penn Today Logo Open Navigation Menu Arts, Humanities, & Social Sciences Sports Campus & Community Education, Business, & Law Health Sciences Science & Technology Search Search Icon Topics Arts, Humanities, & Social Sciences Sports Campus & Community Education, Business, & Law Health Sciences Science & Technology News News Archive Penn in the News Newsletters Announcements University Communications Staff University Communications website Penn Home A-Z Directory Calendar Maps Offices and Services Webmail EventsSee all → 10/6 Benjamin Franklin 300th Anniversary Oct. 6 marks 300 years since Benjamin Franklin arrived in Philadelphia. All Penn students, faculty, staff, alumni, and the local community are invited to attend this celebration, where a free and healthy lunch will be available starting at noon. 12:00 p.m. - 2:00 p.m. Perry World House, 3803 Locust Walk Through 10/6 Flu Clinic 2023 Wellness at Penn hosts its annual flu clinic, offering free flu shots to Penn Card holders. No appointment is necessary. 10:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. Pottruck Health & Fitness Center, 3701 Walnut St. Through 11/30 Biometric Screenings 2023 Penn faculty and staff are invited to a series of screenings on campus for blood pressure, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and blood sugar. The screenings have no cost for participants. Advance registration is required. All Day Various locations 10/18 October Wellness Walk Penn Public Health leads a two-mile walk on and near campus, in recognition of breast cancer awareness. 12:00 p.m. Benjamin Franklin Statue, College Green Close Open Search Bar Close Search Penn Today Logo Demystifying feline behavior Penn Today Logo Open Navigation Menu Search Search Icon Health Sciences Demystifying feline behavior Carlo Siracusa and James Serpell of the School of Veterinary Medicine contextualize recent findings in cat behavior science, debunk some cat-related myths, and explain why our kitties are not just ‘low-maintenance dogs.’ The behavior of cats can perplex even their staunchest fans. They know their names. We can read their facial expressions, sort of. And some of them really like having us around. These are among the purported findings of recent scientific studies aimed at deciphering the behavior of some of our most mysterious yet ubiquitous companions: pet cats. Yet research into cat behavior is extremely limited, and, according to veterinary behavior expert Carlo Siracusa and animal ethics and welfare professor James Serpell of Penn’s School of Veterinary Medicine, the mainstream media—and sometimes scientists themselves—have a habit of overinterpreting such studies. So, what do we know about cat behavior? To mark National Cat Health Month, and the upcoming publication of “Decoding Your Cat,” a book Siracusa co-edited to give cat owners access to digestible, yet science-based information, Penn Today spoke with Siracusa and Serpell about their own research on cat behavior and their thoughts on the field. The conversation, driven by Siracusa’s and Serpell’s scientific and clinical expertise and peppered with anecdotes from their own experiences as cat owners, helps contextualize recent findings in cat behavioral science, underscores why cats are far from “low-maintenance dogs,” and offers guidance for cat owners. James Serpell, professor of ethics and animal welfare at the School of Veterinary Medicine. (Image: Eric Sucar) Carlo Siracusa, associate professor of clinical behavior medicine at the School of Veterinary Medicine (Image: John Donges/Penn Vet) One study of cat behavior showed that cats recognize their names, and another showed they can bond securely to their owners. Overall, however, there seem to be a lot more studies of dog behavior. Why is that? Siracusa: Even though I consider myself a cat person, most of the work that I’ve done is on dogs because that’s where the funding is. In our behavior clinics we see many fewer cats than dogs, I’m talking like 95% dogs and 5% cats. I think this is related in part to the fact that there is much less expectation for cat behaviors. If you have a dog growl and bark at everyone who comes to your apartment, that’s a major problem, but if your cat hisses and then runs and hides, nobody cares. Serpell: Studies show that people are on average less attached to their cats and spend less money on their cats. Cats are numerically more common than dogs in the United States, but there are fewer cat-owning households than dog-owning households, which means that people may be owning more than one cat and thus have less to spend on each one. But recently the Morris Animal Foundation sent a survey to veterinarians around the country and asked what they consider to be areas of primary importance that they needed help with. Almost at the top of the list was cat behavior problems. So, I think people are getting on board slowly with the idea that pet owners are becoming more attached to their cats and that they are becoming much more significant members of people’s social groups. Is there something intrinsic to cats that explains this lack of attention to behavioral science compared to dogs? Siracusa: Dogs evolved from a social species, whereas cats come from an ancestor that was solitary. I don’t think they’ve evolved a social behavior as complex as dogs’ social behavior. And maybe as a result it’s harder for people to understand cats’ social behavior since it’s mostly based on distance and nonprolonged contact. That’s why when you put cats in a small environment, like an urban apartment, especially with other cats, you may run into problems. Serpell: But cats have lived with humans now for about 9,500 years. That’s a long time, and they’ve evolved to be more tolerant of living in close proximity with people and with other cats. There’s all this evidence now coming out about dogs having a gene mutation equivalent to Williams syndrome in humans, which causes hypersociality. I suspect that we might find some of that in domestic cats. These animals are much more sociable than their wild ancestors. You have a wealth of data about cat behavior from Fe-BARQ [the Feline Behavioral Assessment and Research Questionnaire, developed by Serpell]. What are some of the things that the data tell you about cats and their relationship with people? Serpell: From our Fe-BARQ data we see that a surprising number of owners are reporting moderate to severe behavioral problems in a cat when separated from its owner. So much for the theory that cats don’t really care about their owners, that they’re only there for their food; these cats really do seem to be distressed from being away from their human buddies. Siracusa: We see this in clinics. For example, cats may eliminate or vomit if they’re left alone for more hours than usual. So, I think they are definitely attached to people. But the way they’re showing they’re attached is very different from dogs. Dogs make a lot of prolonged physical contact, whereas cats may stay close to the person they like, but they don’t necessarily engage. Some cats may engage a little—one of my cats plays fetch with me—but only for a short time, and then she’s like, ‘Oh, I’ve had enough of this.’ Do you think that cats are more varied in their sociability than dogs? Serpell: I do. Some cats, as soon as you sit down, they’ll be on your lap, and they’ll monopolize you, but others won’t at all. One of my cats loves people; when you arrive at the door, she rushes to the door, and she rubs against you. But she hates being picked up, and she does not want to sit on you ever. Whereas her brother is much more physically affectionate. He wants to be held; he wants to sit on people. There are very few dogs I've met that are standoffish the way a cat is often. Cat behavior can be puzzling. Is the problem that people just aren’t good at interpreting their cat’s behavior? Siracusa: People really do need help understanding their cats’ behavior, and they don’t know where to go or who to ask about these problems. In a recent survey, somewhere between 50 and 60% of cat owners said, ‘I have problems bringing my cat to the vet,’ or ‘My vet doesn’t understand the problems of my cat,’ or ‘I will only bring my cat to the vet when it’s strictly necessary.’ For many cat owners, just picking a cat up and putting it in the crate is a major drama. Serpell: Of course, many dogs also don’t like to go to the vet, but dogs are more biddable; they’ll just go along with it. But cats, boy. I had to bring both of my cats in a week ago, and it was an ordeal. Siracusa: I do think cats are very sensitive to changes in their environment. Serpell: Some of it may relate to the fact that cats are a prey species as well as being a predator. Being in an unfamiliar environment is potentially very unsafe for them, so it’s natural for them to go, ‘Oh, crikey, where am I, and what’s going to come at me next?’ What are some of the big myths or misperceptions about cat behavior? Siracusa: Many people want a cat to be a surrogate for a dog, like a low-maintenance dog, and it’s not. Another misperception is that because cats are so fluffy and soft, people like to touch them a lot, but cats don’t necessarily like this. Some do—some that I’ve had were always on top of me—but others were like, ‘Ok, we’re friends, but you stay there, and I stay here.’ So, it’s a matter of respecting their desire for distance in those cases. Also, people often fail to provide cats with enough stimulation. It’s important to give them opportunities to show their natural feeding behavior, for instance. So instead of simply putting their food in a bowl, give them a chance to stalk it, to toss it in the air and pounce, and reproduce the whole sequence of events that they would do when they hunt. How do you try to correct clients’ misguided impressions about cats? Siracusa: [Laughing] This is the reason our behavior appointments are very long. We try to set realistic expectations, and we provide them with alternative strategies. For example, if you want a nice interaction with your cat, use something cats like. Teach them to do a trick to get a treat. Use a stick-and-feather toy. Serpell: Some cats will play for hours. My cats, they exhaust me. They’ll run all around the house for hours with a piece of string. Siracusa: Sometimes I say, ‘If you need to hug something, get a stuffed toy.’ Don’t do that to your cat if she doesn’t like it. The one recent study about cats showed the same or an even greater degree of attachment to their owners as dogs have. You seem skeptical about those findings. Serpell: Carlo is more than I am. Siracusa: I think the methodology is rigorous. But I’m skeptical because the study assumed that the vocalization of the cats indicated separation distress. I think it’s very likely to be distress from being in an unfamiliar environment, but I’m not convinced that it’s separation distress. Serpell: Speaking on behalf of the article, I would say that there is a perception out there— another one of these myths, if you like—that cats aren’t really attached to their owners, that they’re only there to get fed. I think this study is a demonstration that cats respond similarly to this experimental paradigm as do dogs and for that matter as do human infants, and that's interesting, just in itself. What about the study suggesting cats recognize their name? Siracusa: I think this study is similar; the experiments seem rigorously done, but the results are prone to overgeneralization. For cats it’s not, ‘Oh, my name is Jack.’ It’s, ‘Usually when I hear this word something is about to happen.’ Serpell: It’s a demonstration that the cat has some kind of association with this sound. I think that’s right; my cats respond to their names. But it’s different from what we’ve seen in dogs, some of which have amazing vocabularies and can discriminate between more than a thousand different words. Have you seen the ‘cat whisperer’ quiz that’s going around, based on a recent publication about cat facial expressions? Serpell: It sounds dubious. Cats lack the facial muscles that dogs have so they’re limited in the expressions they can make. Siracusa: Because cats in general were solitary animals evolutionarily, staying at a distance from one another, the facial expressions wouldn’t have been so important in communicating. If I want to communicate with someone who is far away, I wouldn’t show it on my face but in my body, my posture. Serpell: The sense of smell. Siracusa: Smell, definitely. Pheromones are very important. Also, they leave visual signs. The scratching of a cat is a visual sign to leave a message for someone who didn’t find them but will find the scratch. It sounds like the book you have coming out soon might also help pet owners interpret their cats. Siracusa: Yes, ‘Decoding Your Cat’ is coming out in June. It’s a project of the American College of Veterinary Behaviorists, and all the chapters are written by diplomates of the College and edited by myself and two of my colleagues. Our goal was to make sure as much as possible was science-based, and the information that hasn’t been studied was based on our clinical experience. What is on the horizon in terms of cat behavior research? Siracusa: Cat cognition studies will be the next big thing. Serpell: Yes, there are some groups now that are starting to get interested in cat cognition, but it’s still way behind dogs. There are so many dog cognition groups now around the world it’s almost funny. How might studies of cat cognition be helpful? Serpell: Well, it would be interesting to see whether the process of domestication has shifted the cat cognitively in the way that people say it’s shifted the dog. Siracusa: It may help with the animals’ welfare, too, because if we understand them better, we can make sure we create an environment for them that will make them happier in their homes. James Serpell is the Marie A. Moore Professor of Ethics and Animal Welfare and director of the Center for the Interaction of Animals and Society at the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine. Carlo Siracusa is associate professor of clinical behavior medicine at the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine. To contribute to Penn Vet’s cat behavior research: Fe-BARQ online survey. Credits Katherine Unger Baillie Writer Date February 19, 2020 Subtopics Veterinary Medicine, Behavioral Health, Q&A Schools School of Veterinary Medicine Share Twitter Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Facebook Read Next Katalin Karikó and Drew Weissman, Penn’s historic mRNA vaccine research team, win 2023 Nobel Prize in Medicine Health Sciences Social ecology and community work in the Galápagos Undergraduate and graduate students spent two months on San Cristóbal Island this summer, doing research on antibacterial resistance, vectors of disease, climate change adaptation, and the impact of climate change on mental health. Campus & Community At Convocation, students encouraged to take a ‘fisheye’ view Kicking off the University’s 284th academic year, first-year and transfer students were advised to take a wide view during at least some of their time at Penn, expanding horizons and seeing the borderless nature of knowledge. Campus & Community Holman Biotech Commons meets the evolving needs of campus Resources at the Penn Libraries’ Holman Biotech Commons are available to the entire Penn community to support research, collaboration, and innovation. Campus & Community Celebrating a stellar year at Penn A new video offers a glimpse into the 2022-2023 academic year. Penn Today Logo logo-new-2 If there’s news at Penn, you’ll find it here. We strive to bring you faculty, staff, and student profiles, research updates, and the latest happenings on campus. Office of University Communications Suite 200 3901 Walnut Street Philadelphia, PA 19104-3608 215.898.8721 upnews@pobox.upenn.edu Facebook Instagram Twitter LinkedIn Flickr YouTube © 2023 Penn Today, University of Pennsylvania Penn Homepage Disclaimer Emergency Services Privacy Policy Report Accessibility Issues and Get Help Report Copyright Infringement 

Skip to main content Search n i direct Main navigation Home News Contacts Help Twitter Facebook YouTube RSS Welfare of dogs: normal behaviour patterns The way a healthy dog behaves is individual and depends on its age, breed or type and past experience. However, most dogs are playful, sociable animals and they enjoy playing together with toys, people and other dogs. Changes in behaviour may suggest that something is wrong with a dog’s health. Play for dogsPlay is an important part of getting along with people and other dogs, and although dogs will spend some time playing alone with toys, they should have regular opportunities for interactive playing.Dogs are intelligent animals and can suffer from boredom. If your dog is bored, and does not have enough to do, it may suffer or engage in inappropriate behaviour.Rest for dogsAll dogs, in particular puppies, need rest. However, individual dogs have different needs and some will sleep for long periods after exercise or food; others will need less rest and will be more active.Exercise for dogsA dog needs regular exercise and regular opportunities to walk and to run free under proper supervision.The amount of exercise a dog needs varies with age, breed and health. Some breeds of dog need a lot of exercise and you should take account of this when choosing a dog. Young dogs may need to have their exercise restricted during periods of rapid growth, to avoid developmental problems. Exercising dogs in extremes of weather can lead to unnecessary suffering.Places to walk your dog: Forests, Nature Reserves, Country Parks, Parks and green spacesTraining for dogsTraining a dog, including the house training of puppies, is important to help it learn to behave appropriately and to make it easier to keep under control. Puppies need to get used to the many noises, objects and activities in their environment, some of which are frightening when first experienced.Social environment for dogsGetting accustomed to its social environment is an important part of a puppy’s early experience and helps it to develop normal behaviour. Good training can enhance a dog's quality of life, but punishing a dog can cause it pain, unnecessary suffering and cause longer term behavioural problems.What your dog needs to behave normallyYou should:make sure your dog has enough to do so that it does not become distressed or boredmake sure your dog has access to safe toys and suitable objects to play with and chew and that these activities are properly supervisedmake sure your dog can rest undisturbed when it wants tobe aware that puppies and older animals may need more restprovide your dog with regular opportunities for exercise and play with people or other friendly dogsgive your dog the exercise it needs, at least daily unless your vet recommends something else, to keep your dog fit, active and stimulatedtake advice from your vet or other suitably qualified dog care specialist If you are unsure how much exercise your dog needsget to know the behaviour of your dog when it is fit and healthyseek veterinary advice if you become aware of changes in behaviour, as your dog may be distressed, bored, ill or injuredtrain your dog to behave well, ideally from a very young ageonly use positive reward based training - avoiding harsh, potentially painful or frightening training methodsmake sure children allow dogs to exhibit normal behaviours More useful links Dogs Search for a veterinary practice Share this page Share on Facebook (external link opens in a new window / tab) Share on Twitter (external link opens in a new window / tab) Share by email (external link opens in a new window / tab) Welfare of dogs Welfare of dogs: an introductionWelfare of dogs: getting on with other animalsWelfare of dogs: normal behaviour patternsWelfare of dogs: protection from pain and illnessWelfare of dogs: the need for a suitable dietWelfare of dogs: the need for a suitable environment Translation help How to translate this page Help improve this page - send your feedback You must have JavaScript enabled to use this form. What do you want to do? report a problem leave feedback ask a question Report a problem Which problem did you find on this page? (Tick all that apply) A link, button or video is not working There is a spelling mistake Information is missing, outdated or wrong I can't find what I'm looking for Another issue Messages You will not receive a reply. We will consider your feedback to help improve the site. Don't include any personal or financial information, for example National Insurance, credit card numbers, or phone numbers. Tell us more about the problem you're having with the nidirect website. Enter your feedback What is your question about? Choose a topic for your question: - Select -AnglingBenefitsBirth certificatesBlue BadgeCareersCompensation due to a road problemChild MaintenanceCivil partnership certificatesCoronavirus (COVID-19)COVID vaccination certificateCriminal record checks (AccessNI)Death certificatesEducational Maintenance AllowanceEmployment rightsHigh Street Spend Local SchemeMarriage certificatesMotoringnidirect accountPassportsPenalty Charge NoticesPensionsPRONI - historical recordsRates or property valuationProblems with roads and streetsSmartpassMy question is about something else What to do next Comments or queries about angling can be emailed to anglingcorrespondence@daera-ni.gov.uk If you have a comment or query about benefits, you will need to contact the government department or agency which handles that benefit. Contacts for common benefits are listed below. Carer's Allowance Call 0800 587 0912 Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk Discretionary support / Short-term benefit advance Call 0800 587 2750 Email customerservice.unit@communities-ni.gov.uk Disability Living Allowance Call 0800 587 0912 Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk Employment and Support Allowance Call 0800 587 1377 Jobseeker’s Allowance Contact your local Jobs & Benefits office Personal Independence Payment Call 0800 587 0932 If your query is about another benefit, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. Comments or queries about the Blue Badge scheme can be emailed to bluebadges@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk or you can also call 0300 200 7818. For queries or advice about careers, contact the Careers Service. For queries or advice about Child Maintenance, contact the Child Maintenance Service. For queries or advice about claiming compensation due to a road problem, contact DFI Roads claim unit. If you can’t find the information you’re looking for in the Coronavirus (COVID-19) section, then for queries about: Restrictions or regulations — contact the Department of Health Travel advice (including self-isolation) — contact the Department of Health Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccinations — contact the Department of Health or Public Health Agency If your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk and for queries about your certificate, email covidcertni@hscni.net. For queries or advice about criminal record checks, email ani@accessni.gov.uk Application and payment queries can be emailed to ema_ni@slc.co.uk For queries or advice about employment rights, contact the Labour Relations Agency. For queries or advice about birth, death, marriage and civil partnership certificates and research, contact the General Register Office Northern Ireland (GRONI) by email gro_nisra@finance-ni.gov.uk For queries about the High Street Spend Local Scheme, email HSSS.mail@economy-ni.gov.uk. For queries about:Car tax, vehicle registration and SORNcontact the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA), Swansea Driver licensing and tests, MOT and vehicle testingcontact the Driver & Vehicle Agency (DVA), Northern IrelandIf your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk. For queries or advice about passports, contact HM Passport Office. For queries or advice about Penalty Charge Notices (PCNs), including parking tickets and bus lane PCNs, email dcu@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk For queries or advice about pensions, contact the Northern Ireland Pension Centre. If you wish to report a problem with a road or street you can do so online in this section.If you wish to check on a problem or fault you have already reported, contact DfI Roads. For queries or advice about historical, social or cultural records relating to Northern Ireland, use the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI) enquiry service. For queries or advice about rates, email LPSCustomerTeam@lpsni.gov.uk For queries or advice about 60+ and Senior Citizen SmartPasses (which can be used to get concessionary travel on public transport), contact Smartpass - Translink. If you have a question about a government service or policy, you should contact the relevant government organisation directly. We don't have access to information about you. Extra comments (optional) Related sites gov.uk nibusinessinfo.co.uk Links to supporting information Accessibility statement Crown copyright Terms and conditions Privacy Cookies Twitter Facebook YouTube RSS 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Co-evolution with humans 2Intelligence 3Senses 4Communication behavior 5Social behavior Toggle Social behavior subsection 5.1Play 5.1.1Dog and dog 5.1.2Dog and human 5.2Empathy 5.3Personalities 5.4Leadership, dominance and social groups 5.5Scent 5.6Feral dogs 5.7Other behavior 6Reproduction behavior Toggle Reproduction behavior subsection 6.1Estrous cycle and mating 6.2Parenting and early life 7Behavior problems Toggle Behavior problems subsection 7.1Separation anxiety 7.2Resource guarding 7.3Jealousy 7.4Noise anxiety 7.5Tail chasing 8Behavior compared to other canids Toggle Behavior compared to other canids subsection 8.1Early aggression 8.2Tameness 8.3Social structure 8.4Socialization 8.5Cognition 8.6Reproduction 8.7Space 8.8Predation and scavenging 9Dogs in human society Toggle Dogs in human society subsection 9.1Dogs in the family 9.2Dogs at work 10Attacks 11See also 12References 13Further reading 14External links Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Dog behavior 7 languages ΕλληνικάEspañolفارسیFrançaisBahasa MelayuPortuguêsСрпски / srpski Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationGet shortened URLCite this pageWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Internally coordinated responses of dogs to internal and external stimuli A drawing by Konrad Lorenz showing facial expressions of a dog - a communication behavior. X-axis is aggression, y-axis is fear. Dog behavior is the internally coordinated responses of individuals or groups of domestic dogs to internal and external stimuli.[1] It has been shaped by millennia of contact with humans and their lifestyles. As a result of this physical and social evolution, dogs have acquired the ability to understand and communicate with humans.[2] Behavioral scientists have uncovered a wide range of social-cognitive abilities in domestic dogs. Co-evolution with humans[edit] Main article: Origin of the domestic dog The origin of the domestic dog (Canis familiaris) is not clear. Whole-genome sequencing indicates that the dog, the gray wolf and the extinct Taymyr wolf diverged around the same time 27,000–40,000 years ago.[3] How dogs became domesticated is not clear, however the two main hypotheses are self-domestication or human domestication. There exists evidence of human-canine behavioral coevolution. Intelligence[edit] Main article: Dog intelligence Dog intelligence is the ability of the dog to perceive information and retain it as knowledge in order to solve problems. Dogs have been shown to learn by inference. A study with Rico showed that he knew the labels of over 200 different items.[4] He inferred the names of novel items by exclusion learning and correctly retrieved those novel items immediately. He also retained this ability four weeks after the initial exposure. Dogs have advanced memory skills. A study documented the learning and memory capabilities of a border collie, "Chaser", who had learned the names and could associate by verbal command over 1,000 words. Dogs are able to read and react appropriately to human body language such as gesturing and pointing, and to understand human voice commands. After undergoing training to solve a simple manipulation task, dogs that are faced with an insolvable version of the same problem look at the human, while socialized wolves do not. Dogs demonstrate a theory of mind by engaging in deception.[5][6] Senses[edit] Main article: Dog anatomy § Senses The dog's senses include vision, hearing, sense of smell, taste, touch, proprioception, and sensitivity to the Earth's magnetic field. Communication behavior[edit] Main article: Dog communication Dog communication is about how dogs "speak" to each other, how they understand messages that humans send to them, and how humans can translate the ideas that dogs are trying to transmit.[7]: xii These communication behaviors include eye gaze, facial expression, vocalization, body posture (including movements of bodies and limbs) and gustatory communication (scents, pheromones and taste). Humans communicate with dogs by using vocalization, hand signals, and body posture. Dogs can also learn to understand the communication of emotions with humans by reading human facial expressions.[8] Social behavior[edit] Two studies have indicated that dog behavior vary based on their size, body weight, and skull size.[9][10] Play[edit] Dog and dog[edit] Play between dogs usually involves several behaviors often seen in aggressive encounters, such as nipping, biting and growling.[11] It is therefore important for the dogs to place these behaviors in the context of the play, rather than aggression. Dogs signal their intent to play with a range of behaviors including a "play-bow", "face-paw," "open-mouthed play face" and postures inviting the other dog to chase the initiator. Similar signals are given throughout the play to maintain the context of the potentially aggressive activities.[12] From a young age, dogs engage in play with one another. Dog play is made up primarily of mock fights. It is believed that this behavior, which is most common in puppies, is training for important behaviors later in life. Play between puppies is not necessarily a 50:50 symmetry of dominant and submissive roles between the individuals; dogs who engage in greater rates of dominant behaviors (e.g. chasing, forcing partners down) at later ages also initiate play at higher rates. This could imply that winning during play becomes more important as puppies mature.[13] Emotional contagion is linked to facial mimicry in humans and primates. Facial mimicry is an automatic response that occurs in less than 1 second in which one person involuntarily mimics another person's facial expressions, forming empathy. It has also been found in dogs at play, and play sessions lasted longer when there were facial mimicry signals from one dog to another.[14] Dog and human[edit] NASA astronaut Leland D. Melvin with his dogs Jake and Scout The motivation for a dog to play with another dog is different from that of a dog playing with a human. Dogs walked together with opportunities to play with one another and play with their owners with the same frequency as dogs being walked alone. Dogs in households with two or more dogs play more often with their owners than dogs in households with a single dog, indicating the motivation to play with other dogs does not substitute for the motivation to play with humans.[15] It is a common misconception that winning and losing games such as "tug-of-war" and "rough-and-tumble" can influence a dog's dominant relationship with humans. Rather, how dogs play indicates their temperament and relationship with their owner. Dogs that play rough-and-tumble are more amenable and show lower separation anxiety than dogs which play other types of games, and dogs playing tug-of-war and "fetch" are more confident. Dogs that start most games are less amenable and more likely to be aggressive.[16] Playing with humans can affect the cortisol levels of dogs. In one study, the cortisol responses of police dogs and border guard dogs were assessed after playing with their handlers. The cortisol concentrations of the police dogs increased, whereas the border guard dogs' hormone levels decreased. The researchers noted that during the play sessions, police officers were disciplining their dogs, whereas the border guards were truly playing with them, i.e. this included bonding and affectionate behaviors. They commented that several studies have shown that behaviors associated with control, authority or aggression increase cortisol, whereas play and affiliation behavior decrease cortisol levels.[17] Empathy[edit] In 2012, a study found that dogs oriented toward their owner or a stranger more often when the person was pretending to cry than when they were talking or humming. When the stranger pretended to cry, rather than approaching their usual source of comfort, their owner, dogs sniffed, nuzzled and licked the stranger instead. The dogs' pattern of response was behaviorally consistent with an expression of empathic concern.[18] A study found a third of dogs suffered from anxiety when separated from others.[19] Personalities[edit] The term personality has been applied to human research, whereas the term temperament has been mostly used for animal research.[20] However, both terms have been used interchangeably in the literature, or purely to distinguish humans from animals and avoid anthropomorphism.[21] Personality can be defined as "a set of behaviors that are consistent over context and time".[22] Studies of dogs' personalities have tried to identify the presence of broad personality traits that are stable and consistent over time.[21][22][23][24][25] There are different approaches to assess dog personality: Ratings of individual dogs: either a caretaker or a dog expert who is familiar with the dog is asked to answer a questionnaire, for instance the Canine Behavioral Assessment and Research Questionnaire,[26] concerning how often the dog shows certain types of behavior. Tests: the dog is submitted to a set of tests and its reactions are evaluated on a behavioral scale. For instance, the dog is presented to a familiar and then an unfamiliar person in order to measure sociability or aggression.[27] Observational test: The dog's behavior is evaluated in a selected but not controlled environment. An observer focuses on the dog's reactions to naturally occurring stimuli. For example, a walk through the supermarket can allow the observer to see the dog in various types of conditions (crowded, noisy…)[28] Several potential personality traits have been identified in dogs, for instance "Playfulness", "Curiosity/Fearlessness, "Chase-proneness", "Sociability and Aggressiveness" and "Shyness–Boldness".[29][30] A meta-analysis of 51 published peer reviewed articles identified seven dimensions of canine personality:[21] Reactivity (approach or avoidance of new objects, increased activity in novel situations) Fearfulness (shaking, avoiding novel situations) Activity Sociability (initiating friendly interactions with people and other dogs) Responsiveness to training (working with people, learning quickly) Submissiveness Aggression With regard to the nature versus nurture debate, according to a study in April 2022 carried out by Kathleen Morrill and others who work in a laboratory that was based on genetic and survey data of nearly 2000 dogs, with the majority of them having their entire genomes sequenced, as well as survey results from 16,000 owners of dogs. The dogs included mixes and purebreds, with 128 breeds represented. The study found that the physical traits of a dog can be attributed to 80% on DNA and that retrieving and friendliness around humans were predominantly genetic. But, breed alone is only responsible for about 9% of individual personality differences, with about 25% of personality traits determined by (mainly individual) genetics in total, and the rest determined by the environment.[31] However, a study in December 2022 challenged those findings after the researching of the genetic codes of 4,000 dogs and 46,000 dog owners and concluded that a dog’s breed does genetically influence a dog’s personality.[32][33] The effects of age and sex have not been clearly determined.[22] The personality models can be used for a range of tasks, including guide and working dog selection, finding appropriate families to re-home shelter dogs, or selecting breeding stock.[34][35][36] Leadership, dominance and social groups[edit] Two dogs playing follow the leader. Dominance is a descriptive term for the relationship between pairs of individuals. Among ethologists, dominance has been defined as "an attribute of the pattern of repeated, antagonistic interactions between two individuals, characterized by a consistent outcome in favor of the same dyad member and a default yielding response of its opponent rather than escalation. The status of the consistent winner is dominant and that of the loser subordinate."[37] Another definition is that a dominant animal has "priority of access to resources".[37] Dominance is a relative attribute, not absolute; there is no reason to assume that a high-ranking individual in one group would also become high ranking if moved to another. Nor is there any good evidence that "dominance" is a lifelong character trait. Competitive behavior characterized by confident (e.g. growl, inhibited bite, stand over, stare at, chase, bark at) and submissive (e.g. crouch, avoid, displacement lick/yawn, run away) patterns exchanged.[38] One test to ascertain in which group the dominant dog was used the following criteria: When a stranger comes to the house, which dog starts to bark first or if they start to bark together, which dog barks more or longer? Which dog licks more often the other dog's mouth? If the dogs get food at the same time and at the same spot, which dog starts to eat first or eats the other dog's food? If the dogs start to fight, which dog usually wins?[39] Domestic dogs appear to pay little attention to relative size, despite the large weight differences between the largest and smallest individuals; for example, size was not a predictor of the outcome of encounters between dogs meeting while being exercised by their owners nor was size correlated with neutered male dogs.[40] Therefore, many dogs do not appear to pay much attention to the actual fighting ability of their opponent, presumably allowing differences in motivation (how much the dog values the resource) and perceived motivation (what the behavior of the other dog signifies about the likelihood that it will escalate) to play a much greater role.[38] Two dogs that are contesting possession of a highly valued resource for the first time, if one is in a state of emotional arousal, in pain; if reactivity is influenced by recent endocrine changes, or motivational states such as hunger, then the outcome of the interaction may be different than if none of these factors were present. Equally, the threshold at which aggression is shown may be influenced by a range of medical factors, or, in some cases, precipitated entirely by pathological disorders. Hence, the contextual and physiological factors present when two dogs first encounter each other may profoundly influence the long-term nature of the relationship between those dogs. The complexity of the factors involved in this type of learning means that dogs may develop different "expectations" about the likely response of another individual for each resource in a range of different situations. Puppies learn early not to challenge an older dog and this respect stays with them into adulthood. When adult animals meet for the first time, they have no expectations of the behavior of the other: they will both, therefore, be initially anxious and vigilant in this encounter (characterized by the tense body posture and sudden movements typically seen when two dogs first meet), until they start to be able to predict the responses of the other individual. The outcome of these early adult–adult interactions will be influenced by the specific factors present at the time of the initial encounters. As well as contextual and physiological factors, the experiences of each member of the dyad of other dogs will also influence their behavior.[38] Scent[edit] Dogs have an olfactory sense 40 times more sensitive than a human's and they commence their lives operating almost exclusively on smell and touch.[7]: 247 The special scents that dogs use for communication are called pheromones. Different hormones are secreted when a dog is angry, fearful or confident, and some chemical signatures identify the sex and age of the dog, and if a female is in the estrus cycle, pregnant or recently given birth. Many of the pheromone chemicals can be found dissolved in a dog's urine, and sniffing where another dog has urinated gives the dog a great deal of information about that dog.[7]: 250 Male dogs prefer to mark vertical surfaces and having the scent higher allows the air to carry it farther. The height of the marking tells other dogs about the size of the dog, as among canines size is an important factor in dominance.[7]: 251 Dogs (and wolves) mark their territories with urine and their stools.[41] The anal gland of canines give a particular signature to fecal deposits and identifies the marker as well as the place where the dung is left. Dogs are very particular about these landmarks, and engage in what is to humans a meaningless and complex ritual before defecating. Most dogs start with a careful bout of sniffing of a location, perhaps to erect an exact line or boundary between their territory and another dog's territory. This behavior may also involve a small degree of elevation, such as a rock or fallen branch, to aid scent dispersal. Scratching the ground after defecating is a visual sign pointing to the scent marking. The freshness of the scent gives visitors some idea of the current status of a piece of territory and if it is used frequently. Regions under dispute, or used by different animals at different times, may lead to marking battles with every scent marked-over by a new competitor.[7]: 252–4 Further information: Dog communication Feral dogs[edit] Feral dogs are those dogs living in a wild state with no food and shelter intentionally provided by humans, and showing a continuous and strong avoidance of direct human contacts.[42] In the developing world pet dogs are uncommon, but feral, village or community dogs are plentiful around humans.[43] The distinction between feral, stray, and free-ranging dogs is sometimes a matter of degree, and a dog may shift its status throughout its life. In some unlikely but observed cases, a feral dog that was not born wild but living with a feral group can become behavior-modified to a domestic dog with an owner. A dog can become a stray when it escapes human control, by abandonment or being born to a stray mother. A stray dog can become feral when forced out of the human environment or when co-opted or socially accepted by a nearby feral group. Feralization occurs through the development of the human avoidance response.[42] Feral dogs are not reproductively self-sustaining, suffer from high rates of juvenile mortality, and depend indirectly on humans for their food, their space, and the supply of co-optable individuals.[42] See further: behavior compared to other canids. Other behavior[edit] Dogs have a general behavioral trait of strongly preferring novelty ("neophillia") compared to familiarity.[44] The average sleep time of a dog in captivity in a 24-hour period is 10.1 hours.[45] Reproduction behavior[edit] Further information: Canine reproduction Estrous cycle and mating[edit] Although puppies do not have the urge to procreate, males sometimes engage in sexual play in the form of mounting.[46] In some puppies, this behavior occurs as early as 3 or 4 weeks-of-age.[47] Dogs reach sexual maturity and can reproduce during their first year, in contrast to wolves at two years-of-age. Female dogs have their first estrus ("heat") at 6 to 12 months-of-age; smaller dogs tend to come into heat earlier whereas larger dogs take longer to mature. Female dogs have an estrous cycle that is nonseasonal and monestrus, i.e. there is only one estrus per estrous cycle. The interval between one estrus and another is, on average, seven months, however, this may range between 4 and 12 months. This interestrous period is not influenced by the photoperiod or pregnancy. The average duration of estrus is 9 days with spontaneous ovulation usually about 3 days after the onset of estrus.[48] For several days before estrus, a phase called proestrus, the female dog may show greater interest in male dogs and "flirt" with them (proceptive behavior). There is progressive vulval swelling and some bleeding. If males try to mount a female dog during proestrus, she may avoid mating by sitting down or turning round and growling or snapping. Estrous behavior in the female dog is usually indicated by her standing still with the tail held up, or to the side of the perineum, when the male sniffs the vulva and attempts to mount. This tail position is sometimes called "flagging". The female dog may also turn, presenting the vulva to the male.[48] The male dog mounts the female and is able to achieve intromission with a non-erect penis, which contains a bone called the os penis. The dog's penis enlarges inside the vagina, thereby preventing its withdrawal; this is sometimes known as the "tie" or "copulatory lock". The male dog rapidly thrust into the female for 1–2 minutes then dismounts with the erect penis still inside the vagina, and turns to stand rear-end to rear-end with the female dog for up to 30 to 40 minutes; the penis is twisted 180 degrees in a lateral plane. During this time, prostatic fluid is ejaculated.[48] The female dog can bear another litter within 8 months of the previous one. Dogs are polygamous in contrast to wolves that are generally monogamous. Therefore, dogs have no pair bonding and the protection of a single mate, but rather have multiple mates in a year. The consequence is that wolves put a lot of energy into producing a few pups in contrast to dogs that maximize the production of pups. This higher pup production rate enables dogs to maintain or even increase their population with a lower pup survival rate than wolves, and allows dogs a greater capacity than wolves to grow their population after a population crash or when entering a new habitat. It is proposed that these differences are an alternative breeding strategy, one adapted to a life of scavenging instead of hunting.[49] Parenting and early life[edit] All of the wild members of the genus Canis display complex coordinated parental behaviors. Wolf pups are cared for primarily by their mother for the first 3 months of their life when she remains in the den with them while they rely on her milk for sustenance and her presence for protection. The father brings her food. Once they leave the den and can chew, the parents and pups from previous years regurgitate food for them. Wolf pups become independent by 5 to 8 months, although they often stay with their parents for years. In contrast, dog pups are cared for by the mother and rely on her for milk and protection but she gets no help from the father nor other dogs. Once pups are weaned around 10 weeks they are independent and receive no further maternal care.[49] Behavior problems[edit] There are many different types of behavioural issues that a dog can exhibit, including growling, snapping, barking, and invading a human's personal space. A survey of 203 dog owners in Melbourne, Australia, found that the main behaviour problems reported by owners were overexcitement (63%) and jumping up on people (56%).[50] Some problems are related to attachment while others are neurological, as seen below. Separation anxiety[edit] When dogs are separated from humans, usually the owner, they often display behaviors which can be broken into the following four categories: exploratory behaviour, object play, destructive behaviour, and vocalization, and they are related to the canine's level of arousal.[51] These behaviours may manifest as destructiveness, fecal or urinary elimination, hypersalivation or vocalization among other things. Dogs from single-owner homes are approximately 2.5 times more likely to have separation anxiety compared to dogs from multiple-owner homes. Furthermore, sexually intact dogs are only one third as likely to have separation anxiety as neutered dogs. The sex of dogs and whether there is another pet in the home do not have an effect on separation anxiety.[52] It has been estimated that at least 14% of dogs examined at typical veterinary practices in the United States have shown signs of separation anxiety. Dogs that have been diagnosed with profound separation anxiety can be left alone for no more than minutes before they begin to panic and exhibit the behaviors associated with separation anxiety. Separation problems have been found to be linked to the dog's dependency on its owner, not because of disobedience.[51] In the absence of treatment, affected dogs are often relinquished to a humane society or shelter, abandoned, or euthanized.[53] Resource guarding[edit] Resource guarding is exhibited by many canines, and is one of the most commonly reported behaviour issues to canine professionals.[54] It is seen when a dog uses specific behaviour patterns so that they can control access to an item, and the patterns are flexible when people are around.[55] If a canine places value on some resource (i.e. food, toys, etc.) they may attempt to guard it from other animals as well as people, which leads to behavioural problems if not treated. The guarding can show in many different ways from rapid ingestion of food to using the body to shield items. It manifests as aggressive behaviour including, but not limited to, growling, barking, or snapping. Some dogs will also resource guard their owners and can become aggressive if the behaviour is allowed to continue. Owners must learn to interpret their dog's body language in order to try to judge the dog's reaction, as visual signals are used (i.e. changes in body posture, facial expression, etc.) to communicate feeling and response.[54] These behaviours are commonly seen in shelter animals, most likely due to insecurities caused by a poor environment. Resource guarding is a concern since it can lead to aggression, but research has found that aggression over guarding can be contained by teaching the dog to drop the item they are guarding.[55] Jealousy[edit] Canines are one of a number of non-human animals that can express jealousy towards other animals or animal-like objects.[56] This emotion may feed into other behavioural problems, manifest as attention-seeking behaviour, withdrawing from social activity, or aggression towards their owner or another animal or person. Noise anxiety[edit] Canines often fear, and exhibit stress responses to, loud noises. Noise-related anxieties in dogs may be triggered by fireworks, thunderstorms, gunshots, and even loud or sharp bird noises. Associated stimuli may also come to trigger the symptoms of the phobia or anxiety, such as a change in barometric pressure being associated with a thunderstorm, thus causing an anticipatory anxiety. Tail chasing[edit] Tail chasing can be classified as a stereotypy. It falls under obsessive compulsive disorder, which is a neuropsychiatric disorder that can present in dogs as canine compulsive disorder.[57] In one clinical study on this potential behavioral problem, 18 tail-chasing terriers were given clomipramine orally at a dosage of 1 to 2 mg/kg (0.5 to 0.9 mg/lb) of body weight, every 12 hours. Three of the dogs required treatment at a slightly higher dosage range to control tail chasing, however, after 1 to 12 weeks of treatment, 9 of 12 dogs were reported to have a 75% or greater reduction in tail chasing.[58] Personality can also play a factor in tail chasing. Dogs who chase their tails have been found to be more shy than those who do not, and some dogs also show a lower level of response during tail chasing bouts.[57] Behavior compared to other canids[edit] Comparisons made within the wolf-like canids allow the identification of those behaviors that may have been inherited from common ancestry and those that may have been the result of domestication or other relatively recent environmental changes.[42] Studies of free-ranging African Basenjis and New Guinea Singing Dogs indicate that their behavioral and ecological traits were the result of environmental selection pressures or selective breeding choices and not the result of artificial selection imposed by humans.[59] Early aggression[edit] Dog pups show unrestrained fighting with their siblings from 2 weeks of age, with injury avoided only due to their undeveloped jaw muscles. This fighting gives way to play-chasing with the development of running skills at 4–5 weeks. Wolf pups possess more-developed jaw muscles from 2 weeks of age, when they first show signs of play-fighting with their siblings. Serious fighting occurs during 4–6 weeks of age.[60] Compared to wolf and dog pups, golden jackal pups develop aggression at the age of 4–6 weeks when play-fighting frequently escalates into uninhibited biting intended to harm. This aggression ceases by 10–12 weeks when a hierarchy has formed.[61] Tameness[edit] Unlike other domestic species which were primarily selected for production-related traits, dogs were initially selected for their behaviors.[62][63] In 2016, a study found that there were only 11 fixed genes that showed variation between wolves and dogs. These gene variations were unlikely to have been the result of natural evolution, and indicate selection on both morphology and behavior during dog domestication. These genes have been shown to affect the catecholamine synthesis pathway, with the majority of the genes affecting the fight-or-flight response[63][64] (i.e. selection for tameness), and emotional processing.[63] Dogs generally show reduced fear and aggression compared to wolves.[63][65] Some of these genes have been associated with aggression in some dog breeds, indicating their importance in both the initial domestication and then later in breed formation.[63] Social structure[edit] Among canids, packs are the social units that hunt, rear young and protect a communal territory as a stable group and their members are usually related.[66] Members of the feral dog group are usually not related. Feral dog groups are composed of a stable 2–6 members compared to the 2–15 member wolf pack whose size fluctuates with the availability of prey and reaches a maximum in winter time. The feral dog group consists of monogamous breeding pairs compared to the one breeding pair of the wolf pack. Agonistic behavior does not extend to the individual level and does not support a higher social structure compared to the ritualized agonistic behavior of the wolf pack that upholds its social structure. Feral pups have a very high mortality rate that adds little to the group size, with studies showing that adults are usually killed through accidents with humans, therefore other dogs need to be co-opted from villages to maintain stable group size.[42] Socialization[edit] The critical period for socialization begins with walking and exploring the environment. Dog and wolf pups both develop the ability to see, hear and smell at 4 weeks of age. Dogs begin to explore the world around them at 4 weeks of age with these senses available to them, while wolves begin to explore at 2 weeks of age when they have the sense of smell but are functionally blind and deaf. The consequences of this is that more things are novel and frightening to wolf pups. The critical period for socialization closes with the avoidance of novelty, when the animal runs away from – rather than approaching and exploring – novel objects. For dogs this develops between 4 and 8 weeks of age. Wolves reach the end of the critical period after 6 weeks, after which it is not possible to socialize a wolf.[49] Dog puppies require as little as 90 minutes of contact with humans during their critical period of socialization to form a social attachment. This will not create a highly social pet but a dog that will solicit human attention.[67] Wolves require 24 hours contact a day starting before 3 weeks of age. To create a socialized wolf the pups are removed from the den at 10 days of age, kept in constant human contact until they are 4 weeks old when they begin to bite their sleeping human companions, then spend only their waking hours in the presence of humans. This socialization process continues until age 4 months, when the pups can join other captive wolves but will require daily human contact to remain socialized. Despite this intensive socialization process, a well-socialized wolf will behave differently to a well-socialized dog and will display species-typical hunting and reproductive behaviors, only closer to humans than a wild wolf. These wolves do not generalize their socialization to all humans in the same manner as a socialized dog and they remain more fearful of novelty compared to socialized dogs.[68] In 1982, a study to observe the differences between dogs and wolves raised in similar conditions took place. The dog puppies preferred larger amounts of sleep at the beginning of their lives, while the wolf puppies were much more active. The dog puppies also preferred the company of humans, rather than their canine foster mother, though the wolf puppies were the exact opposite, spending more time with their foster mother. The dogs also showed a greater interest in the food given to them and paid little attention to their surroundings, while the wolf puppies found their surroundings to be much more intriguing than their food or food bowl. The wolf puppies were observed taking part in antagonistic play at a younger age, while the dog puppies did not display dominant/submissive roles until they were much older. The wolf puppies were rarely seen as being aggressive to each other or towards the other canines. On the other hand, the dog puppies were much more aggressive to each other and other canines, often seen full-on attacking their foster mother or one another.[69] A 2005 study comparing dog and wolf pups concluded that extensively socialised dogs as well as unsocialised dog pups showed greater attachment to a human owner than wolf pups did, even if the wolf was socialised. The study concluded that dogs may have evolved a capacity for attachment to humans functionally analogous to that human infants display.[70] Cognition[edit] Despite claims that dogs show more human-like social cognition than wolves,[71][72][73] several recent studies have demonstrated that if wolves are properly socialized to humans and have the opportunity to interact with humans regularly, then they too can succeed on some human-guided cognitive tasks,[74][75][76][77][78] in some cases out-performing dogs at an individual level.[79] Similar to dogs, wolves can also follow more complex point types made with body parts other than the human arm and hand (e.g. elbow, knee, foot).[78] Both dogs and wolves have the cognitive capacity for prosocial behavior toward humans; however it is not guaranteed. For canids to perform well on traditional human-guided tasks (e.g. following the human point) both relevant lifetime experiences with humans – including socialization to humans during the critical period for social development – and opportunities to associate human body parts with certain outcomes (such as food being provided by human hands, a human throwing or kicking a ball, etc.) are required.[80] After undergoing training to solve a simple manipulation task, dogs that are faced with an insoluble version of the same problem look at the human, while socialized wolves do not.[73] Reproduction[edit] Dogs reach sexual maturity and can reproduce during their first year in contrast to a wolf at two years. The female dog can bear another litter within 8 months of the last one. The canid genus is influenced by the photoperiod and generally reproduces in the springtime.[42] Domestic dogs are not reliant on seasonality for reproduction in contrast to the wolf, coyote, Australian dingo and African basenji that may have only one, seasonal, estrus each year.[48] Feral dogs are influenced by the photoperiod with around half of the breeding females mating in the springtime, which is thought to indicate an ancestral reproductive trait not overcome by domestication,[42] as can be inferred from wolves[81] and Cape hunting dogs.[82] Domestic dogs are polygamous in contrast to wolves that are generally monogamous. Therefore, domestic dogs have no pair bonding and the protection of a single mate, but rather have multiple mates in a year. There is no paternal care in dogs as opposed to wolves where all pack members assist the mother with the pups. The consequence is that wolves put a lot of energy into producing a few pups in contrast to dogs that maximize the production of pups. This higher pup production rate enables dogs to maintain or even increase their population with a lower pup survival rate than wolves, and allows dogs a greater capacity than wolves to grow their population after a population crash or when entering a new habitat. It is proposed that these differences are an alternative breeding strategy adapted to a life of scavenging instead of hunting.[49] In contrast to domestic dogs, feral dogs are monogamous. Domestic dogs tend to have a litter size of 10, wolves 3, and feral dogs 5–8. Feral pups have a very high mortality rate with only 5% surviving at the age of one year, and sometimes the pups are left unattended making them vulnerable to predators.[42] Domestic dogs stand alone among all canids for a total lack of paternal care.[83] Dogs differ from wolves and most other large canid species as they generally do not regurgitate food for their young, nor the young of other dogs in the same territory.[84] However, this difference was not observed in all domestic dogs. Regurgitating of food by the females for the young, as well as care for the young by the males, has been observed in domestic dogs, dingos and in feral or semi-feral dogs. In one study of a group of free-ranging dogs, for the first 2 weeks immediately after parturition the lactating females were observed to be more aggressive to protect the pups. The male parents were in contact with the litters as 'guard' dogs for the first 6–8 weeks of the litters' life. In absence of the mothers, they were observed to prevent the approach of strangers by vocalizations or even by physical attacks. Moreover, one male fed the litter by regurgitation showing the existence of paternal care in some free-roaming dogs.[85] Space[edit] Space used by feral dogs is not dissimilar from most other canids in that they use defined traditional areas (home ranges) that tend to be defended against intruders, and have core areas where most of their activities are undertaken. Urban domestic dogs have a home range of 2-61 hectares, in contrast to a feral dog's home range of 58 square kilometers. Wolf home ranges vary from 78 square kilometers where prey is deer, to 2.5 square kilometers at higher latitudes where prey is moose and caribou. Wolves will defend their territory based on prey abundance and pack density, but feral dogs will defend their home ranges all year. Where wolf ranges and feral dog ranges overlap, the feral dogs will site their core areas closer to human settlement.[42] Predation and scavenging[edit] Despite claims in the popular press, studies could not find evidence of a single predation on cattle by feral dogs.[42][86][87] However, domestic dogs were responsible for the death of 3 calves over one 5-year study.[87] Other studies in Europe and North America indicate moderate limited success in the consumption of wild boar, deer and other ungulates, however it could not be determined if this was predation or scavenging on carcasses. A new study has shown though that these were most likely due to predation.[88] Feral dogs, like their ancestors do participate in pup rearing. Several studies show that feral dogs are not primarily scavengers, despite claims in the popular press. Studies in the modern era show that their diet is very opportunistic, ranging from garbage, carrion to live prey. The primary feature that distinguishes feral from domestic dogs is the degree of reliance or dependence on humans, and in some respect, their behavior toward people. Feral dogs survive and reproduce independently of human intervention or assistance. While it is true that some feral dogs use human garbage for food, others acquire their primary subsistence by hunting and scavenging like other wild canids.[89] Dogs may resort to hunting more than garbage consuming when their garbage food source is scarce. Even well-fed domestic dogs are prone to scavenge; gastro-intestinal veterinary visits increase during warmer weather as dogs are prone to eat decaying material.[90] Some dogs consume feces, which may contain nutrition.[91][92] On occasion well-fed dogs have been known to scavenge their owners' corpses.[93] Dogs in human society[edit] Further information: Human-canine bond Studies using an operant framework have indicated that humans can influence the behavior of dogs through food, petting and voice. Food and 20–30 seconds of petting maintained operant responding in dogs.[94] Some dogs will show a preference for petting once food is readily available, and dogs will remain in proximity to a person providing petting and show no satiation to that stimulus.[95] Petting alone was sufficient to maintain the operant response of military dogs to voice commands, and responses to basic obedience commands in all dogs increased when only vocal praise was provided for correct responses.[96] A study using dogs that were trained to remain motionless while unsedated and unrestrained in an MRI scanner exhibited caudate activation to a hand signal associated with reward.[2] Further work found that the magnitude of the canine caudate response is similar to that of humans, while the between-subject variability in dogs may be less than humans.[97] In a further study, 5 scents were presented (self, familiar human, strange human, familiar dog, strange dog). While the olfactory bulb/peduncle was activated to a similar degree by all the scents, the caudate was activated maximally to the familiar human. Importantly, the scent of the familiar human was not the handler, meaning that the caudate response differentiated the scent in the absence of the person being present. The caudate activation suggested that not only did the dogs discriminate that scent from the others, they had a positive association with it. Although these signals came from two different people, the humans lived in the same household as the dog and therefore represented the dog's primary social circle. And while dogs should be highly tuned to the smell of items that are not comparable, it seems that the "reward response" is reserved for their humans.[98] Research has shown that there are individual differences in the interactions between dogs and their human that have significant effects on dog behavior. In 1997, a study showed that the type of relationship between dog and master, characterized as either companionship or working relationship, significantly affected the dog's performance on a cognitive problem-solving task. They speculate that companion dogs have a more dependent relationship with their owners, and look to them to solve problems. In contrast, working dogs are more independent.[99] Dogs in the family[edit] In 2013, a study produced the first evidence under controlled experimental observation for a correlation between the owner's personality and their dog's behaviour.[100] Further information: Companion dog Dogs at work[edit] Service dogs are those that are trained to help people with disabilities such as blindness, epilepsy, diabetes and autism. Detection dogs are trained to using their sense of smell to detect substances such as explosives, illegal drugs, wildlife scat, or blood. In science, dogs have helped humans understand about the conditioned reflex. Attack dogs, dogs that have been trained to attack on command, are employed in security, police, and military roles. Service dog programs have been established to help individuals suffering from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and have shown to have positive results.[101] Attacks[edit] Main article: Dog attack A dog's teeth can inflict serious injuries The human-dog relationship is based on unconditional trust; however, if this trust is lost it will be difficult to reinstate.[citation needed] In the UK between 2005 and 2013, there were 17 fatal dog attacks. In 2007–08, there were 4,611 hospital admissions due to dog attacks, which increased to 5,221 in 2008–09. It was estimated in 2013 that more than 200,000 people a year are bitten by dogs in England, with the annual cost to the National Health Service of treating injuries about £3 million.[102] A report published in 2014 stated there were 6,743 hospital admissions specifically caused by dog bites, a 5.8% increase from the 6,372 admissions in the previous 12 months.[103][needs update] In the US between 1979 and 1996, there were more than 300 human dog bite-related fatalities.[104] In the US in 2013, there were 31 dog-bite related deaths. Each year, more than 4.5 million people in the US are bitten by dogs and almost 1 in 5 require medical attention. A dog's thick fur protects it from the bite of another dog, but humans are furless and are not so protected.[105] Attack training is condemned by some as promoting ferocity in dogs; a 1975 American study showed that 10% of dogs that have bitten a person received attack dog training at some point.[106] See also[edit] Gray wolf § Behavior Alpha roll Dog communication Dog intelligence Calming signals Pack (canine) Pack hunter Separation anxiety disorder (humans) Temperament test References[edit] ^ Levitis, Daniel; William Z. Lidicker Jr, Glenn Freund; Freund, Glenn (June 2009). "Behavioural biologists do not agree on what constitutes behaviour" (PDF). Animal Behaviour. 78 (1): 103–10. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2009.03.018. PMC 2760923. PMID 20160973. ^ a b Berns, G. S.; Brooks, A. M.; Spivak, M. (2012). Neuhauss, Stephan C. F (ed.). "Functional MRI in Awake Unrestrained Dogs". PLOS ONE. 7 (5): e38027. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...738027B. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038027. PMC 3350478. PMID 22606363. ^ Skoglund, P.; Ersmark, E.; Palkopoulou, E.; Dalén, L. (2015). "Ancient Wolf Genome Reveals an Early Divergence of Domestic Dog Ancestors and Admixture into High-Latitude Breeds". Current Biology. 25 (11): 1515–9. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.04.019. PMID 26004765. ^ "The New Science Of Understanding Dog Behavior". NPR.org. Retrieved 2022-05-28. ^ Maginnity, M.E. & Grace, R.C. (2014). "Visual perspective taking by dogs (Canis familiaris) in a Guesser–Knower task: evidence for a canine theory of mind?". Animal Cognition. 17 (6): 1375–1392. doi:10.1007/s10071-014-0773-9. PMID 24950722. S2CID 14833483. ^ Kaminski, J.; Bräuer, J.; Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (2009). "Domestic dogs are sensitive to a human's perspective" (PDF). Behaviour. 146 (7): 979–998. doi:10.1163/156853908X395530. ^ a b c d e Coren, Stanley "How To Speak Dog: Mastering the Art of Dog-Human Communication" 2000 Simon & Schuster, New York. ^ Huber, Ludwig (October 2016). "How Dogs Perceive and Understand Us". Current Directions in Psychological Science. 25 (5): 339–344. doi:10.1177/0963721416656329. ISSN 0963-7214. S2CID 151488382. ^ McGreevy, Paul D.; Georgevsky, Dana; Carrasco, Johanna; Valenzuela, Michael; Duffy, Deborah L.; Serpell, James A. (2013). "Dog Behavior Co-Varies with Height, Bodyweight and Skull Shape". PLOS ONE. 8 (12): e80529. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...880529M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0080529. PMC 3864788. PMID 24358107. ^ Stone, Holly R.; McGreevy, Paul D.; Starling, Melissa J.; Forkman, Bjorn (2016). "Associations between Domestic-Dog Morphology and Behaviour Scores in the Dog Mentality Assessment". PLOS ONE. 11 (2): e0149403. Bibcode:2016PLoSO..1149403S. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0149403. PMC 4771026. PMID 26919495. ^ Kujala, Miiamaaria (January 23, 2017). "Human Empathy, Personality and Experience Affect the Emotion Ratings of Dog and Human Facial Expressions". PLOS ONE. 12 (1): e0170730. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1270730K. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0170730. PMC 5257001. PMID 28114335. S2CID 1215168. ^ Horowitz, A. (2009). "Attention to attention in domestic dog Canis familiaris dyadic play". Animal Cognition. 12 (1): 107–118. doi:10.1007/s10071-008-0175-y. PMID 18679727. S2CID 207050813. ^ Ward, C.; Bauer, E.B.; Smuts, B.B. (2008). "Partner preferences and asymmetries in social play among domestic dog, Canis lupus familiaris, littermates" (PDF). Animal Behaviour. 76 (4): 1187–1199. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2008.06.004. S2CID 1295114. ^ Palagi, Elisabetta; Nicotra, Velia; Cordoni, Giada (2015). "Rapid mimicry and emotional contagion in domestic dogs". Royal Society Open Science. 2 (12): 150505. Bibcode:2015RSOS....250505P. doi:10.1098/rsos.150505. PMC 4807458. PMID 27019737. ^ Rooney, N.J.; Bradshaw, J.W.S.; Robinson, I.H. (2000). "A comparison of dog–dog and dog-human play behaviour". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 66 (3): 235–248. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(99)00078-7. ^ Rooney, N.J.; Bradshaw, Jv.W.S. (2003). "Links between play and dominance and attachment dimensions of dog-human relationships". Journal of Applied Animal Welfare Science. 6 (2): 67–94. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.495.1702. doi:10.1207/S15327604JAWS0602_01. PMID 12909524. S2CID 2254971. ^ Horváth, Z.; Dóka, A.; Miklósi A. (2008). "Affiliative and disciplinary behavior of human handlers during play with their dog affects cortisol concentrations in opposite directions". Hormones and Behavior. 54 (1): 107–114. doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2008.02.002. PMID 18353328. S2CID 16805722. ^ Custance, Deborah; Mayer, Jennifer (2012). "Empathic-like responding by domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) to distress in humans: an exploratory study". Animal Cognition. 15 (5): 851–859. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0510-1. PMID 22644113. S2CID 15153091. ^ "Behaviour problems linked to pessimistic dogs". Sydney Morning Herald. October 12, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010. ^ McCrae, R. R.; Costa, P.T; Ostendorf, F.; Angleitner, A.; Hřebíčková, M.; Avia, M. D.; Saunders, P.R. (2000). "Nature over nurture: temperament, personality, and life span development". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 78 (1): 173–86. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.1.173. PMID 10653513. ^ a b c Jones, A. C.; Gosling, S. D. (2005). "Temperament and personality in dogs (Canis familiaris): a review and evaluation of past research". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 95 (1): 1–53. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2005.04.008. ^ a b c Gartner, M. C. (2015). "Pet personality: A review". Personality and Individual Differences. 75: 102–113. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2014.10.042. ^ Fratkin, J. L.; Sinn, D. L.; Patal, E. A.; Gosling, S. D. (2013). "Personality consistency in dogs: a meta-analysis". PLOS ONE. 8 (1): e54907. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...854907F. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0054907. PMC 3553070. PMID 23372787. ^ Vas, J.; Müller, C.; Győri, B.; Miklósi, Á. (2008). "Consistency of dogs' reactions to threatening cues of an unfamiliar person". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 112 (3): 331–344. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2007.09.002. ^ Meegahapola, L.; Constantinides, M.; Radivojevic, Z.; Li, H.; Quercia, D.; Eggleston, M. S. (2023). "Quantified Canine: Inferring Dog Personality from Wearables". Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 1–19. arXiv:2301.06964. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581088. ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5. S2CID 255942162. ^ Hu, Y.; Serpell, J. A. (2003). "Development and validation of a questionnaire for measuring behavior and temperament traits in pet dogs". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 223 (9): 1293–1300. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.223.1293. PMID 14621216. S2CID 9771544. ^ De Meester, R. H.; De Bacquer, D.; Peremans, K.; Vermeire, S.; Planta, D. J.; Coopman, F.; Audenaert, K. (2008). "A preliminary study on the use of the Socially Acceptable Behavior test as a test for shyness/confidence in the temperament of dogs". Journal of Veterinary Behavior: Clinical Applications and Research. 3 (4): 161–170. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2007.10.005. ^ Barnard, S.; Siracusa, C.; Reisner, I.; Valsecchi, P.; Serpell, J. A. (2012). "Validity of model devices used to assess canine temperament in behavioral tests". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 138 (1): 79–87. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2012.02.017. ^ Svartberga, K.; Forkman, B. (2002). "Personality traits in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris)" (PDF). Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 79 (2): 133–155. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(02)00121-1. ^ Svartberg, K; Tapper, I; Temrin, H; Radesater, T; Thorman, S (February 2005). "Consistency of personality traits in dogs". Animal Behaviour. 69 (2): 283–291. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2004.04.011. S2CID 53154729. ^ David Grimm (28 Apr 2022). "Your dog's breed doesn't determine its personality, study suggests". American Association for the Advancement of Science. ^ Emily V. Dutrow; James A. Serpell; Elaine A. Ostrander (8 December 2022). "Domestic dog lineages reveal genetic drivers of behavioral diversification". Cell. ^ Melissa Starlibg (11 December 2022). "Genetic research confirms your dog's breed influences its personality — but so do you". The Conversation. ^ Duffy, D. L.; Serpell, J. A. (2008). "Behavioral assessment of guide and service dogs". Journal of Veterinary Behavior: Clinical Applications and Research. 3 (4): 186–188. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2007.12.010. ^ Bollen, K. S.; Horowitz, J. (2008). "Behavioral evaluation and demographic information in the assessment of aggressiveness in shelter dogs". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 112 (1): 120–135. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2007.07.007. ^ Riemer, S.; Müller, C.; Virányi, Z.; Huber, L.; Range, F. (2013). "Choice of conflict resolution strategy is linked to sociability in dog puppies". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 149 (1): 36–44. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2013.09.006. PMC 4044588. PMID 24910487. ^ a b Drews, Carlos (1993). "The Concept and Definition of Dominance in Animal Behaviour". Behaviour. 125 (3): 283–313. doi:10.1163/156853993X00290. ^ a b c Bradshaw, John W.S.; Blackwell, Emily J.; Casey, Rachel A. (2009). "Dominance in domestic dogs—useful construct or bad habit?" (PDF). Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 4 (3): 135–144. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2008.08.004. ^ Pongrácz, P.; et al. (2008). "How does dominance rank status affect individual and social learning performance in the dog (Canis familiaris)?". Animal Cognition. 11 (1): 75–82. doi:10.1007/s10071-007-0090-7. ISSN 1435-9456. PMID 17492317. S2CID 8930934. ^ Bradshaw, John W.S.; Lea, Amanda M. (1992). "Dyadic Interactions Between Domestic Dogs". Anthrozoös. 5 (4): 245–253. doi:10.2752/089279392787011287. ^ L. David Mech; Luigi Boitani (1 October 2010). Wolves: Behavior, Ecology, and Conservation. University of Chicago Press. pp. 84–. ISBN 978-0-226-51698-1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Boitani, L.; Ciucci, P. (1995). "Comparative social ecology of feral dogs and wolves" (PDF). Ethology Ecology & Evolution. 7 (1): 49–72. doi:10.1080/08927014.1995.9522969. ^ Coppinger, Ray (2001). Dogs: a Startling New Understanding of Canine Origin, Behavior and Evolution. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-85530-1. ^ Kaulfuß, P.; Mills, D.S. (2008). "Neophilia in domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and its implication for studies of dog cognition". Animal Cognition. 11 (3): 553–556. doi:10.1007/s10071-007-0128-x. PMID 18183436. S2CID 31406623. ^ "40 Winks?" Jennifer S. Holland, National Geographic Vol. 220, No. 1. July 2011. ^ Bonnie V. G. Beaver (2009). Canine Behavior: Insights and Answers. Elsevier Health Sciences. ISBN 978-1-4160-5419-1. ^ Edward C. Feldman; Richard William Nelson (2004). Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. Elsevier Health Sciences. ISBN 978-0-7216-9315-6. ^ a b c d "Canine and feline reproduction and contraception". Michelson Prize and Grants. Archived from the original on August 16, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. ^ a b c d Lord, K. (2013). "A Comparison of the Sensory Development of Wolves (Canis lupus lupus) and Dogs (Canis lupus familiaris)". Ethology. 119 (2): 110–120. doi:10.1111/eth.12044. ^ Kobelt, A.J.; Hemsworth, P.H.; Barnett, J.L.; Coleman, G.J. (2003). "A survey of dog ownership in suburban Australia—conditions and behaviour problems". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 82 (2): 137–148. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(03)00062-5. ^ a b Lund, Jørgen Damkjer; Jørgensen, Mads Chr (1999). "Behaviour patterns and time course of activity in dogs with separation problems". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 63 (3): 219–236. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(99)00011-8. ^ Flannigan, G.; Dodman, N.H.A (2001). "Risk factors and behaviors associated with separation anxiety in dogs". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 219 (4): 460–466. doi:10.2460/javma.2001.219.460. PMID 11518171. ^ Karen L. Overall; Arthur E. Dunham; Diane Frank (August 2001). "Frequency of nonspecific clinical signs in dogs with separation anxiety, thunderstorm phobia, and noise phobia, alone or in combination". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 219 (4): 467–473. doi:10.2460/javma.2001.219.467. PMID 11518172 – via AVMA. ^ a b Jacobs, Jacquelyn A.; Pearl, David L.; Coe, Jason B.; Widowski, Tina M.; Niel, Lee (2017). "Ability of owners to identify resource guarding behaviour in the domestic dog". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 188: 77–83. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2016.12.012. ^ a b Jacobs, Jacquelyn A.; Coe, Jason B.; Pearl, David L.; Widowski, Tina M.; Niel, Lee (2017). "Factors associated with canine resource guarding behaviour in the presence of people: A cross-sectional survey of dog owners". Preventive Veterinary Medicine. 161: 143–153. doi:10.1016/j.prevetmed.2017.02.005. PMID 28268035. S2CID 207419404. ^ Harris, Christine R.; Prouvost, Caroline (2014-07-23). "Jealousy in Dogs". PLOS ONE. 9 (7): e94597. Bibcode:2014PLoSO...994597H. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0094597. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 4108309. PMID 25054800. ^ a b Tiira, Katriina; Hakosalo, Osmo; Kareinen, Lauri; Thomas, Anne; Hielm-Bjorkman, Anna; Escriou, Catherine; Arnold, Paul; Lohi, Hannes (2012). "Environmental effects on compulsive tail chasing in dogs". PLOS ONE. 7 (7): e41684. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...741684T. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0041684. PMC 3406045. PMID 22844513. ^ Moon-Fanelli, A.A.; Dodman, N.H. (1998). "Description and development of compulsive tail chasing in terriers and response to clomipramine treatment". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 212 (8): 1252–1257. PMID 9569164. ^ Brisbin, L; Risch, TS (1997). "Primitive dogs, their ecology and behavior: Unique opportunities to study the early development of the human-canine bond". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 210 (8): 1122–1126. PMID 9108912. ^ Frank, Harry; Frank, Martha Gialdini (1982). "On the effects of domestication on canine social development and behavior". Applied Animal Ethology. 8 (6): 507. doi:10.1016/0304-3762(82)90215-2. hdl:2027.42/23918. ^ Feddersen-Petersen, D. (1991). "The ontogeny of social play and agonistic behaviour in selected canid species" (PDF). Bonn. Zool. Beitr. 42: 97–114. ^ Serpell J, Duffy D. Dog Breeds and Their Behavior. In: Domestic Dog Cognition and Behavior. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2014 ^ a b c d e Cagan, Alex; Blass, Torsten (2016). "Identification of genomic variants putatively targeted by selection during dog domestication". BMC Evolutionary Biology. 16: 10. doi:10.1186/s12862-015-0579-7. PMC 4710014. PMID 26754411. ^ Almada RC, Coimbra NC. Recruitment of striatonigral disinhibitory and nigrotectal inhibitory GABAergic pathways during the organization of defensive behavior by mice in a dangerous environment with the venomous snake Bothrops alternatus [ Reptilia , Viperidae ] Synapse 2015:n/a–n/a ^ Coppinger R, Schneider R: Evolution of working dogs. The domestic dog: Its evolution, behaviour and interactions with people. Cambridge: Cambridge University press, 1995. ^ Mech, L. D. 1970. The Wolf: The Ecology and Behavior of an Endangered Species. Natural History Press (Doubleday Publishing Co., N.Y.) 389 pp. (Reprinted in paperback by University of Minnesota Press, May 1981) ^ Freedman, Daniel G.; King, John A.; Elliot, Orville (March 1961). "Critical Period in the Social Development of Dogs". Science. 133 (3457): 1016–1017. Bibcode:1961Sci...133.1016F. doi:10.1126/science.133.3457.1016. PMID 13701603. S2CID 278125. ^ Klinghammer, E. & Goodmann, P. A. (1987). "Socialization and management of wolves in captivity". In H. Frank (ed.). Man and wolf: Advances, issues, and problems in captive wolf research. Dordrecht: W. Junk. ^ Frank H; Frank MG (1982). "On the effects of domestication on canine social development and behavior" (PDF). Applied Animal Ethology. 8 (6): 507–525. doi:10.1016/0304-3762(82)90215-2. hdl:2027.42/23918. ^ Topál, József, Márta Gácsi, Ádám Miklósi, Zsófia Virányi, Enikő Kubinyi, and Vilmos Csányi. "Attachment to humans: a comparative study on hand-reared wolves and differently socialized dog puppies." Animal behaviour 70, no. 6 (2005): 1367-1375. ^ Hare, B. (2002). "The Domestication of Social Cognition in Dogs" (PDF). Science. 298 (5598): 1634–6. Bibcode:2002Sci...298.1634H. doi:10.1126/science.1072702. PMID 12446914. S2CID 13369396. ^ Hare, Brian; Tomasello, Michael (September 2005). "Human-like social skills in dogs?". Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 9 (9): 439–444. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2005.07.003. PMID 16061417. S2CID 9311402. ^ a b Miklósi, Adam; et al. (April 29, 2003). "A simple reason for a big difference: wolves do not look back at humans, but dogs do". Current Biology. 13 (9): 763–766. doi:10.1016/S0960-9822(03)00263-X. PMID 12725735. S2CID 10200094. ^ Gácsi, M; et al. (2009). "Explaining dog wolf differences in utilizing human pointing gestures: Selection for synergistic shifts in the development of some social skills". PLoS ONE. 4 (8): e6584. Bibcode:2009PLoSO...4.6584G. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0006584. PMC 2719091. PMID 19714197. ^ Range, F.; Virányi, Z. (2011). "Development of gaze following abilities in wolves (Canis lupus)". PLOS ONE. 6 (2): e16888. Bibcode:2011PLoSO...616888R. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016888. PMC 3044139. PMID 21373192. ^ Udell, M. A. R; Dorey, N. R.; Wynne, C. D. L. (December 2008). "Wolves outperform dogs in following human social cues". Animal Behaviour. 76 (6): 1767–1773. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2008.07.028. S2CID 11226439. ^ Udell, M. A. R.; Dorey, N. R.; Wynne, C. D. L. (2011). "Can your dog read your mind? Understanding the causes of canine perspective taking". Learning & Behavior. 39 (4): 289–302. doi:10.3758/s13420-011-0034-6. PMID 21643852. ^ a b Udell, M. A. R; Spencer, J. M.; Dorey, N. R.; Wynne, C. D. L. (2012). "Human-Socialized Wolves Follow Diverse Human Gestures... And They May Not Be Alone". International Journal of Comparative Psychology. 25 (2): 97–117. doi:10.46867/IJCP.2012.25.02.04. ^ Udell, M. A.; Giglio, R. F.; Wynne, C. D. (2008). "Domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) use human gestures but not nonhuman tokens to find hidden food". Journal of Comparative Psychology. 122 (1): 84–93. doi:10.1037/0735-7036.122.1.84. PMID 18298285. ^ Udell, M.A.R. (2014). "10. A Dog's-Eye View of Canine Cognition". In A. Horowitz (ed.). Domestic Dog Cognition and Behavior. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 221–240. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-53994-7_10. ISBN 978-3-642-53993-0. ^ Seal, U. S.; Mech, L. D. (July 1983). "Blood Indicators of Seasonal Metabolic Patterns in Captive Adult Gray Wolves". The Journal of Wildlife Management. 47 (3): 704–715. doi:10.2307/3808606. JSTOR 3808606. ^ Cunningham, D. J. (January 1906). "Cape Hunting Dogs (Lycaon pictus) in the Gardens of the Royal Zoological Society of Ireland". Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 25 (2): 843–848. doi:10.1017/S0370164600016667. ^ Kleiman, Devra G.; Malcom, James R. (1981). "The Evolution of Male Parental Investment in Mammals". In Gubernick, David J.; Klopfer, Peter H. (eds.). Parental Care in Mammals. Plenum Press. pp. 347–387. doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-3150-6_9. ISBN 978-0-306-40533-4. ^ Coppinger, Ray (2001). Dogs: a Startling New Understanding of Canine Origin, Behavior and Evolution. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-85530-1. ^ Pal, S. K. (2005). "Parental care in free-ranging dogs, Canis familiaris". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 90: 31–47. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2004.08.002. ^ Scott, M. Douglas; Causey, Keith (July 1973). "Ecology of Feral Dogs in Alabama". The Journal of Wildlife Management. 37 (3): 253–265. doi:10.2307/3800116. JSTOR 3800116. ^ a b Nesbitt, William H. (2009) [1975]. "Ecology of a Feral Dog Pack on a Wildlife Refuge". In Fox, Michael W. (ed.). Wild Canids: Their Systematics, Behavioral Ecology & Evolution (reprinted ed.). Dogwise Publishing. p. 391. ISBN 978-1-929242-64-1. ^ Duarte, Jesús (1 July 2016). "Depredatory impact of free-roaming domestic dogs on Mediterranean deer in southern Spain: implications for human-wolf conflict". Folia Zoologica. 65 (2): 135–141. doi:10.25225/fozo.v65.i2.a8.2016. S2CID 90407348 – via BioOne. ^ Green, Jeffrey S.; Gipson, Philip S. (September 1994). "Feral Dogs" (PDF). University of Nebraska – Lincoln. ^ Wedderburn, Pete (19 September 2017). "Why do dogs get upset stomachs – common causes and treatments". The Telegraph. Retrieved 28 December 2017. ^ "Why Your Dog Eats Poop, and Other Odd Pet Behavior Explained". 4 November 2017. Retrieved 28 December 2017. ^ "Everyone Poops. Some Animals Eat It. Why?". Smithsonian. Retrieved 28 December 2017. ^ "Would Your Dog Eat You if You Died? Get the Facts". National Geographic. 23 June 2017. Retrieved 28 December 2017. ^ Fonberg, E.; Kostarczyk, E.; Prechtl, J. (1981). "Training of Instrumental Responses in Dogs Socially Reinforced by Humans". The Pavlovian Journal of Biological Science. 16 (4): 183–193. doi:10.1007/BF03003358. PMID 7329743. S2CID 28014282. ^ Feuerbacher, E. N.; Wynne, C. D. L. (2015). "Shut up and pet me! Domestic dogs (Canis lupus familiaris) prefer petting to vocal praise in concurrent and single-alternative choice procedures". Behavioural Processes. 110: 47–59. doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2014.08.019. PMID 25173617. S2CID 13565641. ^ McIntire, Roger W.; Colley, Thomas A. (June 1967). "Social Reinforcement In The Dog". Psychological Reports. 20 (3): 843–846. doi:10.2466/pr0.1967.20.3.843. PMID 6042498. S2CID 33962156. ^ Berns, G. S.; Brooks, A.; Spivak, M. (2013). Brass, Marcel (ed.). "Replicability and Heterogeneity of Awake Unrestrained Canine fMRI Responses". PLOS ONE. 8 (12): e81698. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...881698B. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0081698. PMC 3852264. PMID 24324719. ^ Berns, G. S.; Brooks, A. M.; Spivak, M. (2015). "Scent of the familiar: An fMRI study of canine brain responses to familiar and unfamiliar human and dog odors". Behavioural Processes. 110: 37–46. doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2014.02.011. PMID 24607363. ^ Topál, J.; Miklósi, Á.; Csányi, V. (1997). "Dog-human relationship affects problem solving behavior in the dog". Anthrozoös. 10 (4): 214–224. doi:10.2752/089279397787000987. ^ Siniscalchi, Marcello; Stipo, Carlo; Quaranta, Angelo (2013). ""Like Owner, Like Dog": Correlation between the Owner's Attachment Profile and the Owner-Dog Bond". PLOS ONE. 8 (10): e78455. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...878455S. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0078455. PMC 3813613. PMID 24205235. ^ Lee, Mary R.; Olmert, Meg D.; Yount, Rick A. (2012). "Service Dog Training Program for Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress in Service Members" (PDF). U.S. Army Medical Department Journal: 63–9. PMID 22388685. Retrieved 30 September 2017. ^ Prynne, M. (November 6, 2013). "Dog attack laws and statistics". The Telegraph. Retrieved April 14, 2015. ^ "Dog bite hospitalisations highest in deprived areas". NHS Choices. 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2015. ^ Sacks, J.J.; Sinclair, L; Gilchrist, J; Golab, G. C.; Lockwood, R (2000). "Breeds of dogs involved in fatal human attacks between 1979 and 1998" (PDF). JAVMA. 217 (6): 836–840. doi:10.2460/javma.2000.217.836. PMID 10997153. S2CID 10817039. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2015. ^ Miklósi, Ádám (2007). Dog Behaviour, Evolution, and Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199295852.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-929585-2. ^ United States Congress. Senate. Committee on Commerce. Subcommittee on the Environment (1976). Animal Welfare Improvement Act of 1975: Hearing Before the Subcommittee on the Environment of the Committee on Commerce. United States Government. p. 111. Nearly 10 per cent of the dogs that have bitten people have received attack dog training. Further reading[edit] Donaldson, Jean (1991). The Culture Clash. James & Kenneth Publishers. Hare, Brian; Woods, Venessa (2013). The Genius of Dogs. Penguin Publishing Group. Jordan, Rain (2020). Such Small Hands: An Anti-Aversives Primer. Dog's Heart Press. Miklosi, Adam (2007). Dog Behaviour, Evolution, and Cognition. Oxford University Press. "Pet Behavior articles from the ASPCA". External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dog behavior. vteDogsTypes African village dogs Feral dogs Pye-dogs Street dogs Hairless dogs Herding dogs Collies Livestock guardian dogs Sheepdogs Hunting dogs Curs Feists Lurchers Gun dogs Pointers Retrievers Setters Spaniels Water dogs Hounds Scenthounds Bassets Coonhounds Foxhounds Sighthounds Longdogs Terriers Bull-type terriers Pinschers Schnauzers Mastiffs Bulldogs Spitz Huskies Laikas Tugous Toy dogs Bichons Turnspit dogs Breeds List of breeds List of crossbreeds Mixed-breed dogs Crossbreeds Extinct breeds Most popular Roles Assistance dogs Autism dogs Guide dogs Hearing dogs Medical response dogs Seizure dogs Mobility assistance dogs Therapy dogs Psychiatric service dogs Attack dogs Bay dogs Carriage dogs Catch dogs Companion dogs Detection dogs Fighting dogs Guard dogs Lap dogs Meat dogs Mercy dogs Pet dogs Police dogs Search and rescue dogs Sled dogs War dogs Behavior Communication Barking Howling Human–canine bond Intelligence Dog–cat relationship Human–doginteraction Animal testing Baiting Breed-specific legislation Dog bite Dog fighting Dog park Dog show Human–canine bond Dog sports Dog walking Dog daycare Dog grooming Therapy Fear of dogs Dog licence Dog meat Dog food dog biscuit 2007 recalls Dogs in religion Dogs in space Origin of the domestic dog Health Aging (Longest living individual dogs) Anatomy Breeding Coat Conformation Diseases Dog food Odor Rabies in animals Rage syndrome Reproduction Skin disorders Vaccination Training Clicker Crate training Training Housebreaking Socialization Related List of individual dogs List of fictional dogs Category Portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dog_behavior&oldid=1176431326" Categories: Dog training and behaviorEthologyHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2022All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingCommons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 September 2023, at 17:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement Toggle limited content width 

Skip Navigation Where To Buy Sign Up & Save For Dogs FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint For Cats FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Learn Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Contact Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Skip Navigation For Dogs For Cats Learn Contact FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Where To Buy Sign Up & Save Home Dog Care: What's New? Behavior & Appearance 12 Dog Behaviors & What They Mean Interpreting Common Dog Behaviors & the Meaning Behind His Moods tags behavior-appearance Dog Published by min read Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Find food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Shop All Cat Food Find a dog food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Find a cat food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Cat Food Your pup's actions tell you a lot about his mood. And although you may not be fluent in the canine tongue–short of what it means when it salivates–you do need to learn how to interpret dog behavior. Have you ever witnessed your dog licking certain textures or circling the same spot in front of you? There are many reasons a specific dog state of mind or health concern may cause him to do these things. Once you pay attention to his behavior, you'll be able to help him. 1. Bad Breath Dogs aren't known for having wonderfully minty breath, but if you notice a marked change with even a little halitosis, it might be time to take a trip to the veterinarian. There could be something wrong with your dog's oral health. A change in the smell of your dog's breath may also be a cause for concern with respect to his gastrointestinal tract, liver, or kidneys. If your dog's breath smells of urine, for instance, he could have a kidney problem. Sweet-smelling breath is a sign to vets that your dog may have diabetes (especially if he's drinking more water and urinating more often). His overall dog mood may appear happy, but if his breath has changed, pay attention - let your veterinarian know. 2. Biting Puppies may nip at you as they learn how to communicate with their pet parents. This usually happens while playing, as young dogs often communicate with their mouths when they interact. It may also happen during training, or for simply no reason you can identify. If your young one is nipping regularly, though, it's important to stop it before it develops into a more problematic dog behavior down the line. Dogs bite out of anxiety, fear, or aggression. Can you identify which is motivating your pet to do so? Is his mood influencing his actions? If you're having trouble teaching your dog not to bite, consider working with a professional trainer, or better yet, a veterinary behaviorist. Your veterinarian should be able to recommend one for you. 3. Circling Dogs who can't stop walking in circles may have a health issue. Yes, sometimes it's fun to chase your tail, but if your pup can't shake the compulsion, there's a problem beneath the surface. Ear infections may cause circling, but compulsive tail chasing may occur with bull terriers Of course there may be other reasons your buddy is circling. Older dogs may suffer from idiopathic vestibular syndrome, and, not to alarm you, but all dogs are at risk for poisoning or a brain tumor. Only your vet can determine the cause of your dog's circling, so get him in for a checkup. 4. Digging Dogs dig in the ground for many reasons: to escape, to track animals, to make a cool spot to lie, or to hide something important to them. However, some dogs "dig" inside as well. Have you ever noticed your dog scratching at the blankets or couch in order to find the perfect place to lie down? This dog behavior happens most often at night and during nap times, and it is completely normal. If your dog's digging starts to bother you, or damage your furniture, consider working with a professional trainer to reduce this stubborn habit. 5. Eating poop Dogs eat feces for many reasons; it can be a normal (while distasteful to us) dog behavior. Young dogs may watch their mother clean them (who ingests feces as a result), and mimic her. Fear may even cause your dog to eat feces if he's afraid of the repercussions. Then again, your dog may just be curious. He may smell certain scents in the feces and wonder what it tastes like. Eating poop can also be an instinctive solution to a nutritional deficiency. Make sure you feed your dog a well-balanced food like Hill's Science Diet, so you can completely rule out malnutrition as a reason for his eating waste. Contact your veterinarian especially if your dog is losing weight as well. 6. Head Pressing If you notice your dog pressing his head against the wall or another firm object, there's a need for your immediate attention. Head pressing is a common sign of numerous serious problems, such as toxic poisoning or brain disease. Make an appointment with your dog's vet right away. 7. Panting Dogs expel most of their body heat from their mouths. When your dog pants, he's probably too warm, so he is regulating his body temperature. However, it's important to pay attention to panting, as he may do it when in pain as well. Help your pal regulate his temperature and make sure he's well hydrated before any physical activity–especially as the weather warms up. If your dog was injured, get him to the vet immediately. Some other health problems may also show increased panting as a sign, so if you have a question, don't hesitate to contact your vet. 8. Sitting on Your Feet or Between Your Legs This is often mistaken for possessive behavior, but is most often a sign of anxiety or nervousness. "Dominance" is rarely the problem; your dog is probably trying to feel safer by staying close. Anxiety is often more than a dog trainer is qualified to help with so discuss the behavior with your veterinarian and see if your dog would benefit from a referral to a veterinary behavior specialist. 9. Scooting Have you ever watched your dog drag himself across the floor . . . with his bottom on the ground? It may seem funny (or kind of disgusting). But it is also called scooting, and it means there's something irritating your dog's anus. It's possible that your pup's anal sacs are full and need to be expressed. If your dog's anal sacs aren't backed up, the problem could be irritation for some other reason. Allergies may only show up as an itchy rear. While it's common to blame worms, it is an uncommon reason for the behavior. Check with your veterinarian to be sure your pal is on an appropriate parasite prevention program. Finally, a dog who's a grass-eater, or likes to lick around the house, could have strands of grass or hair trapped in his anus that he's rubbing the ground to get out. This is the least-severe reason for scooting but the easiest for you to help him take care of. 10. Urinating If your dog is house trained, it may come as a surprise if you see him urinating in your home. Dog behavior doesn't usually change without reason. Formerly reliable dogs who suddenly begin urinating inside need your attention! This is a sign that something may be very wrong with your furry friend, and when he relieves himself frequently–even if he is in the correct location–it can be a sign of a urinary tract, bladder, or kidney infection. In an older dog, it may even be a sign of dementia. 11. Yawning Although you might think he needs some sleep, a dog yawn doesn't usually mean he's tired. He may be interested in napping, but he could also be showing a sign of fear or stress. If your dog appears to yawn at an increased rate around a new person, don't rush the introduction. He's either picking up vibes he doesn't feel comfortable with, or is fearful for a less-obvious reason. No matter what the case, a forced introduction isn't a good idea. 12. Anxiety Shows in Many Ways Signs of anxiety include shaking, tail tucking, escapist behavior, defecating in the home, biting or injuring himself, barking, and many more, according to PetMD. Because they're technically pack animals, your dog may become fearful when left alone. If separation anxiety is a chronic issue for your dog, you'll both need to learn how to create a relaxing environment when you leave the house. Consider taking your dog for a long walk or play a rigorous game of fetch in your backyard to tire him out before you go. Don't make a big deal out of your departure, either. If you're still having trouble with separation anxiety, consider involving a professional who can work on behavioral training. If your dog is experiencing any of these behaviors, and it's not normal for him, don't hesitate to make an appointment with his vet to rule out any systemic medical issues. Your once social, extremely energetic dog won't suddenly become lethargic and withdrawn. If he does, he's asking for some help. Contributor Bio Erin Ollila Erin Ollila believes in the power of words and how a message can inform, and even transform its intended audience. Her writing can be found all over the internet and in print, and includes interviews, ghostwriting, blog posts, and creative nonfiction. Erin is a geek for SEO and all things social media. She graduated from Fairfield University with an M.F.A. in Creative Writing. Reach out to her on Twitter @ReinventingErin or learn more about her at http://erinollila.com. Related Articles Related Products Related Articles Does My Pet Hate Me? Discover if your dog or cat actually hates you, or the reason why they seem to have a standoffish personality. How Pets Help Ease the Transition to an Empty Nest If you're struggling with the future of an empty nest as your kids go to college or move away, pets can help ease that transition. The Aging Differences Between Humans and Pets Learn about the signs of aging in dogs and cats and how they compare similarly to those in humans so you can provide the best care for your aging pet. When is a Puppy an Adult Dog? By one year old, you puppy will be an adult dog – some behaviors may not change any time soon, but his needs in many areas have changed. Related products Hill's Science Diet Adult Large Breed Chicken & Barley Recipe Dog Food Supports healthy joints, immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful coat Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Small & Mini Savory Stew with Chicken & Vegetables Dog Food A delicious complement to the nutrition of <span class='nowrap'>Science Diet</span> Small Paws™ dry dog food Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Small Paws Savory Stew with Beef & Vegetables Dog Food A delicious complement to the nutrition of <span class='nowrap'>Science Diet</span> Small Paws™ dry dog food Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Large Breed Lamb Meal & Brown Rice Recipe Dog Food Supports healthy joints, immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful coat Buy Now » Our Brands Prescription Diet Science Diet Browse By Age For Dogs Puppy Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) For Cats Kitten Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) Education Cat Articles And Tips Dog Articles and Tips Nutritional Philosophy About Hill's Our Company Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Careers Create or Manage a Business Account Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Shelter Partners Natural Disaster Support United States [English] (opens a modal dialog) FacebookTwitterPinterestInstagramYoutube Hillsvet.com Site Map Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Do Not Sell My Personal Information ©2021 Hill's Pet Nutrition, Inc. As used herein, denotes registered trademark status in the U.S. only; registration status in other geographies may be different. Your use of this site is subject to the terms of our Legal Statement. About our Ads. Cookie Consent Tool PLEASE SELECT YOUR PREFERRED LOCATION AND LANGUAGE Argentina Australia Austria - Österreich Беларусь Belgium - België Belgium - Belgique Belize Bolivia Brazil - Brasil България Canada (English) Canada (Français) Chile Colombia Costa Rica Croatia - Hrvatska Cyprus - English Cyprus - Greek Czech Republic - Česká Republika Denmark - Danmark Dominican Republic - República Dominicana Ecuador Eesti Finland - Suomi France - France Грузия Germany - Deutschland Greater China - Hong Kong SAR Greater China - Hong Kong SAR – (English) Greater China - Taiwan Greece - Ελλάδα Guatemala Honduras Magyarország India Indonesia Ireland ישראל Italy - Italia 日本 Latvia - Latvija Lietuva Malaysia (Bahasa) México Netherlands - Nederland New Zealand Nicaragua Norway - Norge Panamá Paraguay Peru Philippines (English) Poland - Polska Portugal Puerto Rico (English) Puerto Rico (Español) 대한민국 Republic of Singapore (English) România Russia - Россия Srbija Slovensko Slovenija South Africa Spain - España Sweden - Sverige Switzerland (Suisse) Switzerland (Schweiz) Svizzera Thailand - ไทย Turkey - Türkiye United Kingdom Ukraine - Україна United Arab Emirates (English) United States Uruguay Venezuela 

Skip to Main Content Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Menu Find a pet Main menuFind a pet Find a pet Rehome a pet Rehome a pet How to rehome Rehome a horse Rehome a horse How to rehome a horse Foster an animal Foster an animal Horse fostering Advice for adopters Advice for adopters Advice and welfare Main menuAdvice and welfare Advice and welfare Pets Pets Dogs Cats Rabbits Horses Rodents Ferrets Exotic pets Ornamental Fish General Giving up a pet Pet bereavement Find or call a vet Pet theft Brachycephalic animals Lost and found Lab animals Lab animals Phasing out Are animal experiments necessary? Testing chemicals Medicines and vaccines Replacing research animals Reducing research animal suffering Primates and research Biotechnology Farm animals Farm animals Farm animals as pets Slaughter On-farm Live transport Pigs Laying hens Sheep Farmed fish Meat chickens Ducks Dairy cows Beef cattle Turkeys Farmed rabbits Foie Gras Worried about a farm animal? Bovine TB Litter Litter Fishing litter Alternatives to balloons and sky lanterns Single use plastics Sky lanterns Seasonal advice Seasonal advice Spring Summer Autumn Winter Floods Pets at Christmas Diseases Diseases Alabama rot Performing animals Performing animals Guidelines Report concerns FAQs The cost-of-living crisis The cost-of-living crisis Pet cost calculator Food bank Food bank donation point Dog behaviour care costs Wildlife friendly gardening Wildlife friendly gardening The RSPCA wildlife garden Wildlife Wildlife Foxes Squirrels Hedgehogs Otters Seals Bats Rats and mice Rabbits and Hares Find a wildlife rescue centre Wildlife deterrents Injured wild animals Badgers Snakes Deer Wildlife in captivity Wildlife laws Get involved Main menuGet involved Get involved Volunteer Volunteer What can I do? What's it like to volunteer with us? Volunteers' week Big Help Out Campaign Campaign Puppy trade Stun before slaughter Primates as pets Sentient beings Circuses Sanctuaries Farm Animals Better chicken Tougher sentencing Make Wales kinder for animals I'm a Celebrity Stop live exports Animal rehoming Fur Free Britain Gene editing Pets as prizes End the cage age Lab animal regulations Save our breath Join our campaign network Achievements Phase Out Lab Animals Fireworks Slaughterhouses Rabbit breeding End Sky Litter Ear cropping Vapes Better labels better choices End Breed Specific Legislation Act now for animals Donate Donate Leaving a legacy Current appeals Donate in memory Advice for donors Payroll Giving Unwanted items Gift Aid Sponsorship Philanthropy Win Win Raffle Lottery Fundraise Fundraise Virtual challenges At school Animal Hero Running Trekking Cycling Training hub Own place in an event Ideas and resources Fundraising pack Pay in your offline fundraising Swimming My Big Walkies #50MilesForAnimals Young people Young people Subscription Renewal Buttercup Farm 30DaysForAnimals Membership Membership Membership policy statement Events Events Local events One Fun Day Christmas Concert Howloween Great British Spring Clean Businesses Businesses Become a partner Our corporate partners Other ways companies can support What we do Main menuWhat we do What we do Strategy to 2030 Strategy to 2030 Getting justice for animals Ambitions End cruelty End cruelty Investigate cruelty Rescue animals Prevent suffering Prosecution Change the law Work internationally Care for animals Care for animals Rehabilitation Release Our wildlife centres Veterinary care Home for Life Financial assistance Education Education Children in school Young offenders At home Latest Latest News Our blog Publications The Dog Rescuers Jo Brand's Kitten Rescue Media contacts Adoptober RSPCA 2022 essay collection Animal Kindness Index 2022 Wilberforce Lecture Facts, figures and myths Who we are Who we are Governance Our branches Our executives High profile supporters Our history How we work How we work Our mission Policies RSPCA's rules Shop Main menuShop Shop Pet friendly holidays Pet friendly holidays Shop and donate Shop and donate Pet insurance Pet insurance Cat insurance Dog insurance Rabbit insurance Multi-pet insurance Product information FAQs Make a claim My RSPCA Main menu My RSPCA My account My account My pets My pets Sign in Sign in Your local RSPCA Your local RSPCA Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Share this... Relevant Documents Advice for nervous dogs (164 KB) How to teach your dog to give up a toy (141 KB) How to teach your dog recall (165 KB) Understanding Dog Behaviour (PDF: 525KB) How to teach your dog basic commands (268 KB) Understand mouthing and play biting behaviour (156 KB) Find a clinical animal behaviourist If you are concerned about your pet's behaviour, contact a behaviour expert. Establishing a good relationship with you dog Find out how to establish a good relationship with your dog. Separation anxiety in dogs Telltale indicators include destructive behaviour, unwanted toileting or reports of barking. Buying a puppy Environment Diet Behaviour Aggression Separation anxiety Treatment Body language Barking Company Health and welfare Responsible dog walking Training your dog #DogKind Hidden How we help In 2022 we investigated and closed 63,563 complaints of animal cruelty Get in touch Find your local RSPCA Contact us Report cruelty Our charity Media centre Science RSPCA Assured Education Follow us Or sign up for email updates © RSPCA 2023. All rights reserved. The RSPCA helps animals in England and Wales. Registered charity no.219099. Terms and conditions Site map National privacy notice Accessibility Modern slavery Contact us Jobs 

Close Search About Us Everyday Care Main Menu CareClub Know Your Pet Breed Information Press Center Main Menu Press Center Events Careers Shop Explore Shop Main Menu Explore Shop All Products All Products Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Dogs For Dogs Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Cats For Cats Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets Find Care Welcome to Existing Account Already have a myVCA account? Log in 24/7 to access your pet’s health care information. Log In Now Activate Your Account Looking for a convenient way to access your pet’s health records, refill prescriptions, view upcoming appointments and more? Set up your myVCA account today. Activate Account Find Care myVCA Search Shopping Cart × Search Home Know Your Pet Dog Behaviorwhats Normal And Whats Not Dog Behavior--What is Normal? By Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Lynn Buzhardt, DVM Print Article Dogs will be dogs. They will fetch, roll over, and beg. They will also chew, dig, and bark. Sometimes, they are cute, and sometimes, they are troublesome. Which canine behaviors are normal and which are problematic? Heritage and Behavior Some canine behaviors are innate. Long ago, dogs were bred to accomplish certain tasks. For example, a Border Collie may chase bikes because he was bred to herd sheep and wants to corral the bicycle. A Beagle may bark at a new scent or sound because she was bred to track and hunt. Some dogs repeat the survival skills of their ancestors that lived in the wild, so a Samoyed may dig a hole in the yard because he is trying to make a cool, comfortable bed outdoors. Often what we view as problem behavior is just a dog being a dog. But, if your dog digs in the flower bed, scares the neighborhood kids while they ride bikes, or disturbs your sleep by barking all night, the behavior is problematic. By examining some common dog behaviors and the instincts that underlie these behaviors, we can better understand how to defuse situations without punishing the dog for “doing what comes naturally." Degrees of Misbehavior If your dog “misbehaves," try to rank his infractions. There are different levels of undesirable behavior. 1. Behaviors within the normal range for the age and breed of dog. Some annoying behaviors are just plain normal. For example, chewing in pups is expected while they are teething. Pet parents need to effectively redirect this temporary behavior so it does not become a persistent problem. Offer them suitable chew toys that are considered high value so they focus there and not on your favorite running shoes or couch. 2. Behaviors that lie within or just beyond the normal range. Some behaviors are challenging because, although they are considered normal, they may be harmful and difficult to manage. For example, it’s normal for dogs to mark their territory, but urinating on a new couch is a no-no. Understanding the basis of the behavior will help you deflect it. But you should have a realistic level of expectation. Cleaning up a little urine is part of being a dog owner. 3. Behaviors that lie outside the normal range and are considered problematic. Some behaviors are definitely abnormal. Serious behavior disorders may be the result of emotional issues related to insufficient early socialization, medical conditions, or genetic predispositions. Behavior problems like fear aggression or resource guarding require working with professionals who can provide training guidance and behavioral modification medications when needed. Fortunately, most common canine behavior problems fall into categories 1 and 2 and are temporary or manageable. Common Behavior Issues When inherited behaviors pose a problem, find an outlet for the behavior that suits both you and your dog. Here are some common behavior issues that can be resolved or reduced so that human and canine family members live in harmony. 1. Barking. Almost all dogs bark, and pet owners know that they must endure a little racket. However, excessive barking that disrupts the household or disturbs the neighbors is a problem. Determine why your dog is barking. If he barks to get your attention, he may be insecure. Ignore him until he stops, then reward his quiet time. If your dog barks when someone knocks on the door, he is instinctively guarding his territory. Shouting at him to hush fuels the frenzy. Talk to him in a soothing voice and reassure him that the intruder is not a threat. If your dog barks when you return home because he is excited to see you, ask him to sit and give him time to settle down before playing with him. 2. Chewing. Chewing is natural for all dogs. Dogs examine the world with their mouths and may gently chew an object out of curiosity. Pups chew a lot because they have so many new things to examine. Plus, teething and chewing helps soothe sore gums. Unfortunately, some adult dogs chew when bored or excited and are destructive. Destructive chewing is an abnormal manifestation of a normal behavior. Try “doggie proofing” the house by placing items out of reach. Consider confining your dog to a crate when you are not around to supervise. Also, provide chew toys or high value rewards/treats such as stuffing a toy with some peanut butter or their kibble to give the dog an acceptable outlet for his chewing instinct. 3. Digging. Dogs historically dig to carve out a good place to sleep or to bury their treasures. Digging removes small branches and stubble that make for an uncomfortable bed. In hot climates, moving the topsoil exposes underlying earth that is cooler to sleep on. Make sure your dog has a cool, comfortable spot to rest outside. Digging is normal unless your dog digs excessively out of anxiety or boredom and destroys the garden or injures his paws. To combat boredom, exercise your dog more. Increased physical activity may decrease digging. You can also try using deterrents (noxious odors, electric fences). Or, as a last resort, you can try to redirect the digging instinct by creating a digging area in the yard where you bury small treats. While not optimal, sacrificing a small portion of the yard may save the flower garden! If the root cause is anxiety related, you need to try to identify the trigger and consider using some medications while working on modifying the behavior. 4. Chasing. A dog’s predatory or herding instinct precipitates the need to chase moving objects or people. This behavior puts both the chaser and the one being chased in peril. Train your dog to “freeze” on command and come when called. Keep him on leash when walking and be aware of potential triggers such as kids on bikes or joggers. Fill his need to chase by playing fetch in the safety of your own back yard. 5. Biting. Pups may nip at other dogs or people as a result of inherited pack mentality while they learn their place in their pack or family. This is normal, but when biting extends beyond puppyhood or becomes harmful, it is abnormal behavior. Some dogs only bite when they are in pain, feel threatened or fearful, or are guarding their territory. These behaviors are understandable, but can still be harmful. Some dogs display dominance aggression and are simply dangerous. Constant owner vigilance, responsible breeding practices, early training, and socialization can reduce problem biting. Keywords Behavior Pet Services Find a Hospital Locate a hospital near you Learn more Related Articles VCA ANIMAL HOSPITALS About Us Contact Us Find a Hospital Location Directory Press Center Social Responsibility Career Opportunities Grow Your Hospital Sitemap Affiliate of Mars Inc. 2023 | © Copyright VCA Animal Hospitals all rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Web Accessibility | AdChoices | Cookie Notice | Cookie Settings | Your Privacy Choices 

Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Sign In Breeds A-Z Expert Advice Products & Services Sports & Events Clubs & Delegates Breed Explorer View All Breeds Find By Breed Name Select A Breed Affenpinscher Afghan Hound Airedale Terrier Akita Alaskan Klee Kai Alaskan Malamute American Bulldog American English Coonhound American Eskimo Dog American Foxhound American Hairless Terrier American Leopard Hound American Staffordshire Terrier American Water Spaniel Anatolian Shepherd Dog Appenzeller Sennenhund Australian Cattle Dog Australian Kelpie Australian Shepherd Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog Australian Terrier Azawakh Barbado da Terceira Barbet Basenji Basset Fauve de Bretagne Basset Hound Bavarian Mountain Scent Hound Beagle Bearded Collie Beauceron Bedlington Terrier Belgian Laekenois Belgian Malinois Belgian Sheepdog Belgian Tervuren Bergamasco Sheepdog Berger Picard Bernese Mountain Dog Bichon Frise Biewer Terrier Black and Tan Coonhound Black Russian Terrier Bloodhound Bluetick Coonhound Boerboel Bohemian Shepherd Bolognese Border Collie Border Terrier Borzoi Boston Terrier Bouvier des Flandres Boxer Boykin Spaniel Bracco Italiano Braque du Bourbonnais Braque Francais Pyrenean Braque Saint-Germain Brazilian Terrier Briard Brittany Broholmer Brussels Griffon Bull Terrier Bulldog Bullmastiff Cairn Terrier Canaan Dog Cane Corso Cardigan Welsh Corgi Carolina Dog Catahoula Leopard Dog Caucasian Shepherd Dog Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Central Asian Shepherd Dog Cesky Terrier Chesapeake Bay Retriever Chihuahua Chinese Crested Chinese Shar-Pei Chinook Chow Chow Cirneco dell’Etna Clumber Spaniel Cocker Spaniel Collie Coton de Tulear Croatian Sheepdog Curly-Coated Retriever Czechoslovakian Vlcak Dachshund Dalmatian Dandie Dinmont Terrier Danish-Swedish Farmdog Deutscher Wachtelhund Doberman Pinscher Dogo Argentino Dogue de Bordeaux Drentsche Patrijshond Drever Dutch Shepherd English Cocker Spaniel English Foxhound English Setter English Springer Spaniel English Toy Spaniel Entlebucher Mountain Dog Estrela Mountain Dog Eurasier Field Spaniel Finnish Lapphund Finnish Spitz Flat-Coated Retriever French Bulldog French Spaniel German Longhaired Pointer German Pinscher German Shepherd Dog German Shorthaired Pointer German Spitz German Wirehaired Pointer Giant Schnauzer Glen of Imaal Terrier Golden Retriever Gordon Setter Grand Basset Griffon Vendéen Great Dane Great Pyrenees Greater Swiss Mountain Dog Greyhound Hamiltonstovare Hanoverian Scenthound Harrier Havanese Hokkaido Hovawart Ibizan Hound Icelandic Sheepdog Irish Red and White Setter Irish Setter Irish Terrier Irish Water Spaniel Irish Wolfhound Italian Greyhound Jagdterrier Japanese Akitainu Japanese Chin Japanese Spitz Japanese Terrier Jindo Kai Ken Karelian Bear Dog Keeshond Kerry Blue Terrier Kishu Ken Komondor Kromfohrlander Kuvasz Labrador Retriever Lagotto Romagnolo Lakeland Terrier Lancashire Heeler Lapponian Herder Large Munsterlander Leonberger Lhasa Apso Löwchen Maltese Manchester Terrier (Standard) Manchester Terrier (Toy) Mastiff Miniature American Shepherd Miniature Bull Terrier Miniature Pinscher Miniature Schnauzer Mountain Cur Mudi Neapolitan Mastiff Nederlandse Kooikerhondje Newfoundland Norfolk Terrier Norrbottenspets Norwegian Buhund Norwegian Elkhound Norwegian Lundehund Norwich Terrier Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever Old English Sheepdog Otterhound Papillon Parson Russell Terrier Pekingese Pembroke Welsh Corgi Perro de Presa Canario Peruvian Inca Orchid Petit Basset Griffon Vendéen Pharaoh Hound Plott Hound Pointer Polish Lowland Sheepdog Pomeranian Pont-Audemer Spaniel Poodle (Miniature) Poodle (Standard) Poodle (Toy) Porcelaine Portuguese Podengo Portuguese Podengo Pequeno Portuguese Pointer Portuguese Sheepdog Portuguese Water Dog Pudelpointer Pug Puli Pumi Pyrenean Mastiff Pyrenean Shepherd Rafeiro do Alentejo Rat Terrier Redbone Coonhound Rhodesian Ridgeback Romanian Carpathian Shepherd Romanian Mioritic Shepherd Dog Rottweiler Russell Terrier Russian Toy Russian Tsvetnaya Bolonka Saint Bernard Saluki Samoyed Schapendoes Schipperke Scottish Deerhound Scottish Terrier Sealyham Terrier Segugio Italiano Shetland Sheepdog Shiba Inu Shih Tzu Shikoku Siberian Husky Silky Terrier Skye Terrier Sloughi Slovakian Wirehaired Pointer Slovensky Cuvac Slovensky Kopov Small Munsterlander Smooth Fox Terrier Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier Spanish Mastiff Spanish Water Dog Spinone Italiano Stabyhoun Staffordshire Bull Terrier Standard Schnauzer Sussex Spaniel Swedish Lapphund Swedish Vallhund Taiwan Dog Teddy Roosevelt Terrier Thai Bangkaew Thai Ridgeback Tibetan Mastiff Tibetan Spaniel Tibetan Terrier Tornjak Tosa Toy Fox Terrier Transylvanian Hound Treeing Tennessee Brindle Treeing Walker Coonhound Vizsla Volpino Italiano Weimaraner Welsh Springer Spaniel Welsh Terrier West Highland White Terrier Wetterhoun Whippet Wire Fox Terrier Wirehaired Pointing Griffon Wirehaired Vizsla Working Kelpie Xoloitzcuintli Yakutian Laika Yorkshire Terrier Explore by characteristic or group Select Characteristic or Group Smallest Dog Breeds Medium Dog Breeds Largest Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds of Dogs Hypoallergenic Dogs Best Family Dogs Best Guard Dogs Best Dog Breeds for Kids Best Dogs for Apartments Hairless Dog Breeds Best Dogs For Apartment Dwellers Large Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds Of Dog Apartment Dogs Sporting Group Hound Group Working Group Terrier Group Toy Group Non-Sporting Group Herding Group Miscellaneous Class Foundation Stock Service Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Compare Breeds Compare up to 5 different breeds side by side Find a Puppy Browse the AKC Marketplace to find the right puppy for you Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Featured Names The Most Popular Dog Names of 2022 Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Dog Name Finder Browse our extensive library of dog names for inspiration Can My Dog Eat____? Find out the best and worst foods for your dog and which to avoid Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products Shop Dog Products Breed-Specific Products Dog Toys & Treats Training Products Dog Gift Packs DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog Register a Purebred Dog Register a Litter Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Registration Downloadable Forms AKC Marketplace Find a Puppy AKC Rescue Network PuppyVisor Search Counselor Breeder Referral Contacts Dog Training Services Canine Good Citizen (CGC) GoodDog Helpline Find a Training Club Health & Dog Care Find a Dog Groomer AKC Pet Insurance AKC Reunite Microchips AKC Veterinary Network AKC S.A.F.E. Grooming Program Breeder Programs & Services Breeder Toolkit Breeder E-Z Reg Breeder Of Merit Program Bred With H.E.A.R.T Program Breeder Education AKC Canine College Browse All Services Featured Products Video Training Consultations PURCHASE NOW GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Match Shows 4-6 Month Beginner Puppy Puppy of Achievement National Owner Handled Series FSS Open Show Companion Sports Agility Obedience Rally Tracking Title Recognition Program Public Service Dog Barn Hunt Disc Dog Diving Dogs Flyball Search & Rescue Parent Club Title Recognition Performance Sports Field Events for Hounds Coursing, CAT & FAST CAT Earthdog Herding & Farm Dog Pointing Breeds Retrievers Scent Work Spaniels & Flushing Breeds Sports for Juniors Junior Showmanship Juniors in Companion Events Juniors in Performance Events PeeWee Special Attractions AKC Family Dog Program CGC & AKC S.T.A.R. Puppy AKC Trick Dog AKC Therapy Dog AKC Fit Dog AKC Temperament Test RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Share: Search Sign In Menu Breeds A-Z View All Breeds Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Compare Breeds Find a Puppy Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Expert Advice Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Dog Name Finder Can My Dog Eat____? Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products & Services Products Shop Dog Products DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog AKC Marketplace Dog Training Services Health & Dog Care Breeder Programs & Services AKC Canine College Browse All Services Sports & Events GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Companion Sports Title Recognition Program Performance Sports Sports for Juniors AKC Family Dog Program RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Clubs & Delegates Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Home Expert Advice Help & Advice Why does my dog... How To Read Dog Body Language Back To Why does my dog... How To Read Dog Body Language By Stephanie Gibeault, MSc, CPDT Published: Jan 27, 2020 | 5 Minutes Updated: Jun 22, 2023 Published: Jan 27, 2020 | 5 Minutes Updated: Jun 22, 2023 ktmoffitt/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images communication Dog body language involves a series of unique methods for communicating emotions and intentions. It can be quite different from how humans communicate with one another. A lot of canine communication consists of barks, whines, and growls, so it’s important to know what dog sounds mean. More often, though, dogs rely on nonverbal body language. That can lead to plenty of human-dog misunderstandings. Sometimes, dog body language is simply unfamiliar (after all, people don’t have tails). At other times, it’s in direct contrast with what that same signal means to a human, such as when it comes to yawning or looking away. To better communicate with your canine companion, learn some tips on reading dog body language. Tail-Wagging Tail-wagging seems like an obvious body language signal. If a dog’s tail is wagging, the dog is happy, right? Wrong. People misinterpret this signal all the time. All a wagging tail means is that the dog is emotionally aroused. It could be excitement, but it could be frustration or worse. To interpret the dog’s emotions and intentions, look at the speed and direction of the wag, as well as the position of the tail. Basically, the faster the wag, the more aroused the dog. Think about those long, slow, side-to-side tail sweeps your dog makes when greeting you — the type that wags the dog’s whole body. That’s a relaxed dog. A faster, twitch-like wag indicates a higher level of arousal, possibly in a negative way. Think of a guard dog on alert. ©Dogs - stock.adobe.com The direction of the wag may hold clues as well. A study on tail-wagging showed that dogs tend to wag their tails more to the right when feeling positive about something, like interacting with their owner. Tails wagged more to the left when dogs faced something negative. Then, there’s the helicopter tail wag (where the dog’s tail spins in a circle). Without question, that’s a happy wag. You’ll usually see it when a dog is greeting a beloved person. Finally, the position of the dog’s tail relative to the ground holds important clues about their emotional state. Essentially, the higher the tail, the more assertive the dog. Dogs with their tails pointing down to the ground or even tucked between their legs are feeling fear and stress. Dogs with their tails held up like a flag are feeling confident, perhaps even aggressive. Relaxed dogs hold their tails in a neutral position, but neutral depends on the breed. Some breeds, such as the Chow Chow, have tails that naturally curl over their backs, whereas some other breeds, like the Italian Greyhound, have a very low neutral tail position. If you get to know your dog’s neutral tail position, you will more quickly recognize when their emotions have shifted. Raised Hackles When a dog’s hackles are raised, it means the hair along their back is standing up. Technically called piloerection, the fur can fluff up across the shoulders or down the back and all the way to the tail. This is a definite sign that the dog is aroused, but not necessarily in a negative way. The dog might be upset or stressed but could also be excited or intensely interested in something. It’s often an involuntary reaction, like goosebumps in people. Posture A dog’s weight distribution can tell a lot about mood and intention. Consider a cowering dog that is hunched toward the ground. That’s a sign of fear or stress. The dog may be trying to get away from something and the posture makes the dog appear smaller. In other words, it says, “I mean no harm.” The extreme of this posture is a dog that rolls onto their back, exposing their belly. This may look like a dog soliciting a belly rub, and in a relaxed dog, it often is. But it can actually be a sign of considerable stress and anxiety. The dog may even urinate a little in appeasement. The opposite posture is a dog with their weight shifted forward. This dog is trying to get closer to something. This might simply indicate the dog’s interest. But it could also indicate offensive intentions, particularly paired with other aggressive body language cues like a twitching tail held high. In this case, the dog is trying to appear larger. Marielle - stock.adobe.com An easy-to-read aspect of dog body language is the play bow. This is when dogs place their chest on the ground with their rump in the air. As the name implies, it’s used to initiate play with other dogs and even with people. A less easily understood signal is the paw raise. In pointing breeds like the English Setter, the paw raise is part of pointing behavior, where the dog indicates nearby prey. But outside of this context, a raised paw often indicates a dog is uncertain about a situation or perhaps feels a bit insecure. Facial Expressions Dogs have similar facial features as people, but they don’t use them in the same way. Consider yawning. People yawn when they’re tired or bored, but dogs yawn when they’re stressed. According to Turid Rugaas, author of On Talking Terms With Dogs: Calming Signals, dogs use yawning to calm themselves in tense situations and to calm others, including their owners. She suggests yawning at your dog to provide comfort at stressful moments like a vet visit. But don’t be surprised if your dog yawns back. Just as yawning is contagious in people, dogs can “catch” yawns, too. Lip-licking is another bit of dog body language that people often misinterpret. Just like people, dogs will lick their lips after a delicious meal, but they will also do it when they feel anxious. Sometimes the tongue flick is so quick it’s tricky to notice. Your dog isn’t signaling a desire to lick your face, but rather discomfort with a given situation. The most confusing facial expression is smiling. Yes, some dogs smile, and if you’re not familiar with the expression it can look terrifying. Usually, when dogs bare their teeth, it serves as a warning, as if they’re saying, “Look at my weapons.” It’s hard to mistake the aggressive intention of a snarl, especially when it’s paired with a menacing growl. The corners of the dog’s lips form the shape of a C and the front teeth are fully displayed. Smiling dogs also display their front teeth, but the meaning is the complete opposite. Also known as a submissive grin, this expression is often found on a happy dog with a loose and wiggly posture. The dog’s overall attitude says, “Hello, I come in peace.” Eyes You can learn a lot about your dog’s internal state by looking at the eyes. First, a dog’s eyes can be soft or hard. Soft eyes have relaxed lids and sometimes look like the dog is squinting. They indicate the dog is calm or happy. The opposite is hard eyes, where the eyes seem to go cold. These indicate a negative state of mind, and you’ll know them when you see them. The dog might be guarding a toy or feeling aggressive. A hard stare, where the dog looks intently at something, especially for a long time, usually signals a threat. Eye contact is an important signal for dogs. Just as the hard stare can be a precursor to aggression, looking away is meant to calm a situation. When dogs feel stressed, they will pointedly look away and avoid eye contact. People often interpret this as their dog ignoring them or being stubborn, but the dog is expressing discomfort. ©Dogs - stock.adobe.com The whites of the eyes are another key indicator. Known as “whale eye,” when a dog shows the whites of the eyes, it’s a signal they are feeling anxious or stressed in a situation. You might see them when you make your dog uncomfortable, like when you pat your dog on the head, or when they’re afraid someone will steal a bone or toy. Deciphering Dog Body Language None of these dog body language signals act alone. They are all part of a package. So, when you read a dog’s communication, look at every signal the dog is using from the tail height to the eye shape. Your dog is “talking” to you all the time. If you learn what your dog is saying, you will develop a deeper bond of trust and respect. Plus, your newfound understanding of your dog’s emotional state will help you predict your dog’s behavior and prevent problems before they occur. Related article: Do Dogs Sniff to Get Their Social Media Fix? https://www.akc.org/wp-admin/admin-ajax.php Get Your Free AKC eBook Canine Body Language Your Dog is Trying to Tell You Something. Dogs communicate their wants, needs, happiness and fear primarily through body language. Are you ready to learn what your dog is trying to tell you? Download this e-book to learn more. SUBMIT *Turn off pop-up blocker to download DOWNLOAD E-BOOK *Turn off pop-up blocker to download AKC Privacy Policy AKC is a participant in affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to akc.org. If you purchase a product through this article, we may receive a portion of the sale. TOP Founded in 1884, the not-for-profit AKC is the recognized and trusted expert in breed, health, and training information for all dogs. AKC actively advocates for responsible dog ownership and is dedicated to advancing dog sports. ABOUT US + About AKC Our Mission Our History Minutes & Reports AKC Library & Archives Awards & Honors Press Center Board of Directors & Executive Officers Careers Newsletter Subscriptions Contact Us Top Services + Find a Puppy Find a Dog Groomer Register Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Dog Training Help Shop AKC Store Top Resources + Delegates Portal Downloadable Forms Rules, Regulations & Policies Answer Center Judges' Directory Government Relations Inspections & Compliance Working It Out℠ Guide & FAQs Active Shooter & Mass Attack Safety Resources Get Involved + Attend a Dog Show Participate in an Event Donate to AKC Find a Dog Club AKC Humane Fund Favorite Things + Watch Dog Shows Top 100 Girl Dog Names Top 100 Boy Dog Names Most Popular Dog Breeds Hypoallergenic Dog Breeds Why Do Dogs Eat Poop? Why Is My Dog Limping? How to Remove a Tick How to Potty Train a Puppy CBD Oil for Dogs Best Dog Podcast Best Calming Treats for Dogs Advertise With AKC Terms of Use Privacy & Cookies CA Privacy Rights Website Info & FAQs Linking Policy Material Reproduction Policy © The American Kennel Club, Inc. 2022. All rights reserved. 

Skip to content ASPCA Our WorkHelping People and PetsInvestigations and RescueAnimal Care and RecoveryImproving Laws for AnimalsThe Puppy IndustryProtecting Farm AnimalsAdvancing Horse WelfareASPCA GrantsLocal ServicesNew York CityLos AngelesMiami, FLAsheville, NCOklahoma City, OKHow You Can HelpWays to GiveGet InvolvedFind More Humane FoodAdopt a PetAdvocate for AnimalsReceive Text Updates Primary Nav Menu Our WorkHelping People and Pets Investigations and Rescue Animal Care and Recovery Improving Laws for Animals The Puppy Industry Protecting Farm Animals Advancing Horse Welfare ASPCA Grants Local ServicesNew York City Los Angeles Miami, FL Asheville, NC Oklahoma City, OK How You Can HelpWays to Give Get Involved Find More Humane Food Adopt a Pet Advocate for Animals Receive Text Updates Search form Search About Us Adopt NYC News ASPCA Pro Donate You are herePet Care Dog Care Common Dog Behavior Issues If you're looking for help treating your dog’s behavior issue, or just curious about why your dog does what he does, you've come to the right place. Find out more here about common dog behavior issues to help you and your pup address some of our canine friends' behaviors and habits. Aggression Aggression is the most common and most serious behavior problem in dogs. Different forms of aggression require different treatments. Read more Barking Each type of bark serves a distinct function for dogs. Identify the reason for barking before seeking treatment. Read more Destructive Chewing Chewing accomplishes a number of things for dogs, but they must learn what is and is not acceptable to chew. Read more Food Guarding Resource guarding can range from benign to aggressive. Learn how to prevent and treat this canine behavior. Read more Howling Like barking, dogs howl for many reasons. Learn what to do if your dog howls excessively. Read more Mounting and Masturbation Although mounting, humping and masturbation are normal dog behaviors, there are steps you can take to curb them. Read more Mouthing, Nipping and Play Biting in Adult Dogs Adult dogs can inadvertently cause injury with their mouths. You can teach your dog to be gentle instead. Read more Mouthing, Nipping and Biting in Puppies Young dogs explore the world with their mouths, but it’s important to train them away from mouthy behavior. Read more Separation Anxiety Many dogs become destructive or disruptive when left alone. Read tips to help manage separation anxiety. Read more Whining Dogs whine for different reasons. Identify the trigger before seeking treatment. Read more Other Ways to Help: Become a Monthly Member Advocate for Animals Join the Advocacy Brigade Volunteer or Foster Share this page: Help the ASPCA Put a Stop to Animal Cruelty Donate Stay Up to Date First Name * Last Name * Email Address * Mobile Number (Optional) By providing my mobile number, I agree to receive 2-4 text messages per month from the ASPCA, which may include requests for charitable donations. Text STOP to opt-out, HELP for more info. Message and data rates may apply. Terms & Conditions / Privacy Policy Leave this field blank ASPCA About Us Careers Contact Press Strategic Cause Partnerships Pet Care Shop © 2023 American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. All rights reserved.The ASPCA is a 501(c)(3) non-for-profit organization. Privacy Policy Legal Info FacebookTwitterYoutubeInstagramTikTok Our Partnerships Subaru ASPCA Pet Health Insurance Underwritten by United States Fire Insurance Company 

Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search Login Subscribe Subscribe Home Quizzes & Games History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Companions Demystified Image Galleries Infographics Lists Podcasts Spotlights Summaries The Forum Top Questions #WTFact 100 Women Britannica Kids Saving Earth Space Next 50 Student Center Home Quizzes & Games History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos dog Table of Contents dog Table of Contents Introduction & Top QuestionsOrigin and history of dogsAncestryRole in human societiesOrigin of breedsPhysical traits and functionsGeneral characteristicsTeethDigestive systemSkeletal structureSensesCoatsReproductionSexual maturityReproductive cycleGestation and whelpingReproductive capacityBehaviourTerritory and rangeBarkingBehavioral developmentBreed-specific behaviourDogs as petsSelectionNutrition and growthTrainingOther maintenance concernsAilmentsThe breedsSporting dogsHoundsTerriersWorking dogsHerding dogsToysNon-Sporting dogsBreed standardsRelated canidsWolvesCoyotesFoxesJackalsOther wild canids References & Edit History Related Topics Images & Videos For Students dog summary Quizzes Best In Show Dog Fun Facts Quiz Animal Factoids Dogs Quiz All About Pets Quiz Related Questions What is a dog? Why do dogs bark? Why do dogs sniff other dogs’ rear ends? How are dog years calculated? When do dogs need shots? Read Next Abundant Animals: The Most Numerous Organisms in the World Are Dogs Really Color-Blind? Working Like a Dog: 7 Animals with Jobs 6 Domestic Animals and Their Wild Ancestors 9 of the World’s Deadliest Mammals Discover A Brief (and Fascinating) History of Money What State Is Washington, D.C. In? How Did Alexander the Great Really Die? Ten Days That Vanished: The Switch to the Gregorian Calendar The Death of Shakespeare Titanosaurs: 8 of the World's Biggest Dinosaurs Secret Service Code Names of 11 U.S. Presidents Home Science Mammals Dogs & the Canine Family Breed-specific behaviour CollieThere are distinctive breed-typical personalities that have been developed through generations of selection for certain traits. By roughly grouping dogs according to the work they were bred to do, it is possible to determine the type of temperament a dog might have at maturity. Differences in breed personalities can be seen at an early age. Sporting dogs will generally be adventurous, following their noses wherever scents lead them, but will respond enthusiastically to calls from familiar humans. Hounds generally tend to be more aloof and independent, inclined to scout the territory on their own and follow a scent or a movement; they are not as interested in human interaction as the bird dogs are. Working and herding dogs have more business-like dispositions. They tend to evaluate situations and set about their tasks. Collie puppies have been known to herd children, ducklings, or each other in an instinctive manifestation of their birthright. Guarding dogs tend to be protective of their territories, even at an early age. Such dogs as the Maremma or the kuvasz, which are bred to guard flocks, are placed with the sheep from the time they are puppies in order to reinforce their basic protective instincts. Collies and Akitas are known for their strong sense of loyalty. Terriers, bred to chase and catch rodents, have a tendency to be extremely active, lively, and feisty as puppies, traits that continue into adulthood. Newfoundlands are renowned for lifesaving instincts. Breed specificity also affects how well dogs adapt to new surroundings or to new owners. Such things cannot be taught to dogs. They are innate—part of a dog’s instinctive behaviour—and are often breed-specific, although mixed breeds have been known for unique instincts as well. Dogs as pets The companionship between humans and dogs is not a new phenomenon. However, in modern society most dogs are owned as pets, not because of the work they were bred to do. Many breeds, such as the toy dogs, were developed precisely to be pets. All of the diverse breeds and mixed breeds have unique traits and appeal to different kinds of people. Acquiring a dog is a major decision, because the dog becomes totally dependent on its owner for its care and welfare. This responsibility continues throughout the life of the dog. Thus, the initial decision should be based on a serious consideration of whether one’s lifestyle truly lends itself to owning a dog—that is, whether a dog would be an asset rather than a liability. Selection The next consideration is the selection of a particular type of dog. Many people want a purebred dog because they like the appearance or the personality, and they are assured that the puppy they buy will grow up to look like the breed it represents. Others find that a mixed breed will do just as well, and there are many shelters, humane societies, and rescue groups that harbour dogs in need of homes. No matter what kind of dog a person chooses, it is essential that it be a healthy animal. When evaluating a puppy or an adult dog, several features will help determine the physical condition of the animal. The dog should appear friendly and outgoing. Puppies in particular should exhibit curiosity and a tail-wagging enthusiasm. They should not hang back or appear timid or frightened. Eyes should be bright and shiny with no discharge, and the inner eyelids ought to be smooth and pink. Ears should be clean-smelling and free of debris. Gums must be pink and firm, except in the case of chow chows and shar-peis, whose gums and tongue are black. The skin should feel warm and dry to the touch. Clammy skin or the presence of reddened patches, crusts, scales, or parasites are indicative of problems that could be both external and internal. The hair coat ought to be clean and sweet-smelling. The dog should be in good form and build, but not obese or so thin that the ribs and hipbones show. People buying purebred dogs should know the distinctive characteristics of the breed they have chosen, so that they can ask the breeder proper questions and have some means of evaluating the quality of the dog they are purchasing. Many purebred dogs have hidden genetic problems of which good breeders are aware. Many of these problems can be controlled by careful breeding, but the purchaser must know—through reading about the breed and talking to fanciers—what questions to ask. Mixed-breed dogs also can have hidden genetic problems, but there is no way to determine what they might be or whether they will eventually affect the dog in an adverse manner. Great strides are being made in veterinary research to identify genetic defects and thereby assist breeders to select the best breeding stock. By eliminating from their gene pool those dogs with genetic abnormalities, breeders can help ensure that the breed remains healthy and viable. Nutrition and growth Australian Shepherd: puppiesPuppies need three basic things in order to thrive: good nutrition, warmth, and companionship. Puppies need to eat three or four times a day from the time they are weaned until they are about six months old. Thereafter they can be fed twice a day until maturity and once daily after that. However, many dog owners, especially those with large breeds, feed twice a day throughout the dog’s life (this does not mean feeding more than the required daily amount, but it is a more balanced method of feeding). Puppies need twice an adult dog’s maintenance requirements of energy and nutrients for proper growth from the time they are weaned until they reach about half of their expected mature weight. There should be steady growth on a weekly basis, but there should be no excess fat around the abdomen. Puppies grow best if they remain at a suitable weight without becoming obese. Overweight puppies are candidates for crippling bone diseases if they are too heavy during the critical growing months. On the other hand, feeding too little will result in poor growth and lack of energy. Adult dogs burn fewer calories than do puppies or young and active adults. Therefore, they need to eat less in order to maintain optimum weight and activity. Dogs that work require extra nutrients. For instance, sled dogs need to be fed a diet that is much higher in calories, one with a ratio of fat, protein, and carbohydrates very different from the diet of more sedentary dogs. Owners may have to experiment with different types of food to determine which are best suited to their dogs. There are three basic types of commercially produced dog foods: canned, dry, and semimoist. Predominant ingredients of most of these include corn, wheat, barley, rice, or soy meal, in combination or alone. Commercial dog foods also include a meat such as beef, lamb, chicken, or liver, or meat by-products. It is important to read the labels to determine the proportions of each and the amounts of proteins, carbohydrates, fats, and vitamins and minerals contained. Sleep is almost as important as nutrition for puppies. A warm, quiet place for them to rest is essential for normal growth. Puppies will usually play vigorously and then suddenly fall asleep. Their need for sleep decreases as they grow into adulthood, but dogs spend a great deal of their time sleeping when they are not stimulated to activity. All dogs need exercise, some more than others. Achieving good health and sound temperament demands that dogs be given the opportunity for regular stimulating exercise. Puppies should be allowed to run at will without restraint and without being pushed beyond their limits. As dogs mature, jogging or walking on a lead can be introduced, but any forced exercise should be withheld until the dog is fully grown. The most common cause of a dog’s destructive behaviour in the house is lack of exercise. Behavioral problems such as tail chasing, chewing, and excessive barking and whining can in most cases be traced to confinement for long periods of time without respite. The ability to provide adequate exercise is one of the most important considerations that prospective dog owners must face before acquiring a puppy. Exercise, however, does not mean allowing the dog to run at large. Dogs ought to be supervised at all times when outside: they either should be accompanied by owners using a lead or have a securely fenced area in which to play. The term companion animal means that dogs need company. They are happiest when allowed to be an integral part of the household. Puppies thrive and learn when they are included in the household routine at an early age. Training becomes easier when the unique bond between human and dog is strengthened from the beginning. 

honeypot link skip to main content MSD Manual Veterinary Manual The trusted provider of veterinary information since 1955 A A A A A A Species Filter Topics That Apply to All Animals Clear Filter Expand All Amphibians Amphibians-Laboratory Amphibians-Pet Amphibians- Zoo and Wildlife Birds Birds-Pet Birds-ZooandWildlife Cats Cats-Pet Cats-Shelter Cattle Cattle-Beef Cattle-Diary Cattle Dogs Dogs-Pets Dogs-Shelter Ducks Ducks-Productions Ducks-Zoo and Wildlife Exotics Amphibians Amphibians-Laboratory Amphibians-Pet Amphibians- Zoo and Wildlife Birds Birds-Pet Birds-ZooandWildlife Ferrets Marsupials Marsupials-Pets Marsupials Zoo and Wildlife primates Primates-Laboratory Primates-Zoo and Wildlife Rabbits Rabbits-Laboratory Rabbits-Pet Rabbits-Wild and Zoolife Reptiles Reptiles-Laboratory Reptiles-Pet Reptiles-ZooAndWildlife Rodents Rodents-Laboratory Rodents-Pet Rodents-Zoo and Wildlife Fish Fish-Aquaculture Fish-Pet Fish-Zoo And Wildlife Goats Horses Llamas and Alpacas Alpacas Lamas Pigs Pigs-Production Pigs-Pet Poultry Chickens-Backyard Geese - Zoo and Wildlife Ducks-Zoo and Wildlife Poultry-Production Chickens-Production Ducks-Productions Geese-Production Turkeys-Production Turkeys - Zoo and Wildlife Rabbits Rabbits-Laboratory Rabbits-Pet Rabbits-Wild and Zoolife Reptiles Reptiles-Laboratory Reptiles-Pet Reptiles-ZooAndWildlife Rodents Rodents-Laboratory Rodents-Pet Rodents-Zoo and Wildlife Sheep Zoo and Wildlife Amphibians- Zoo and Wildlife Birds-ZooandWildlife Crocodilians Edentates Equids Marine-Mammals Marsupials Zoo and Wildlife Primates-Zoo and Wildlife Ratites Reptiles-ZooAndWildlife Rodents-Zoo and Wildlife Ungulates and Sububgulates Apply Cancel Search Enter search terms to find related veterinary topics, multimedia and more. Advanced Search: • Use “ “ for phrases o [ “canine influenza”] • Use – to remove results with certain terms o [pig –guinea] • Use OR to account for alternate terms o [alopecia OR “hair loss” ] Search A-Z HOME VETERINARY CONTENT PET HEALTH & WELLNESS RESOURCES QUIZZES ABOUT Disclaimer Privacy Terms of use Contact Us Human Health Manuals VETERINARY PET A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Veterinary / Behavior / Normal Social Behavior and Behavioral Problems of Domestic Animals / Behavioral Problems of Dogs / IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Social Behavior of Horses Behavioral Problems of Horses Social Behavior of Cattle Behavioral Problems of Cattle Social Behavior of Swine Behavioral Problems of Swine Social Behavior of Sheep Behavioral Problems of Sheep Social Behavior of Goats Behavioral Problems of Goats Social Behavior of Chickens Behavioral Problems of Chickens Social Behavior of Dogs Behavioral Problems of Dogs Social Behavior of Cats Behavioral Problems of Cats Professional Version Behavioral Problems of Dogs By Gary M. Landsberg , BSc, DVM, MRCVS, DACVB, DECAWBM, North Toronto Veterinary Behaviour Specialty Clinic; Sagi Denenberg , DVM, DACVB, Dip. ECAWBM (Behaviour), MACVSc (Behaviour), North Toronto Veterinary Behaviour Specialty Clinic Reviewed/Revised May 2014 | Modified Oct 2022 Fears and Phobias Separation Anxiety: Abnormal Repetitive Behaviors Aggression Fear-related Aggression: Possessive Aggression (Resource Guarding): Play Aggression: Redirected Aggression: Irritable/Conflict/Impulse Control Aggression: Aggression Toward Other Dogs: Territorial/Protective Aggression: Predatory Aggression: Pain-induced and Medical Causes of Aggression: Maternal Aggression: Treatment of Fears, Phobias, Anxiety, and Aggression Hyperactivity Destructive Behaviors Eating Disorders Elimination Behavioral Problems Housesoiling: Marking Behavior: Excitement, Submission, and Conflict-related Elimination: Other Elimination Disorders: Aging and Cognitive Dysfunction Topic Resources 3D Models (0) Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (0) Tables (1) Clinical Presentation and... Videos (0) When behavior of dogs is undesirable, there are three levels of consideration: 1) Behaviors within the normal range for the species, age, and breed. In these cases, the owners need guidance on how to effectively manage the behaviors. 2) Behaviors more difficult or challenging, because they might fall within or just beyond the range of what is considered normal but are particularly intense or difficult to manage. Examples include mouthing, urine marking, mounting, barking, chasing, predation, or overactivity. Also in this category might be what could be normal for the breed but unsuitable for the family and home (ie, mismatch). These cases require behavior assessment and counseling to ensure the owners have a realistic understanding of what might be achieved and to implement treatment strategies, including environmental management and behavior modification, to achieve an acceptable level of improvement for both the owners and the pet. 3) Behaviors that are abnormal or pathologic, as a result of emotional disorders or mental health issues. These may have developed as a result of genetic factors, stressful perinatal environment (prenatal, neonatal), insufficient early socialization, medical conditions affecting brain health and development, or particularly traumatic environmental events. For these pets, the prognosis may be guarded, and owner expectations altered to achieve an acceptable outcome. Treatment generally requires both environmental management and behavioral modification, often in combination with medication (natural products, diet, drugs) to improve underlying pathology and facilitate learning. The process to diagnose behavior problems and their treatment with behavior modification and drugs has been previously described ( see Treatment of Behavioral Problems Treatment of Behavioral Problems In production animals, treatment focuses on group management, environmental or housing modifications, and in some cases removing individual animals out of or to other groups. Specifics are covered... read more ). If the problem is determined to be a normal but undesirable behavior, the owners will need counseling on how to effectively provide for the pet’s needs and how to reinforce what is desirable while preventing what is undesirable. For most canine behavior management problems, counseling from veterinary staff or trainers and quality resources are required, as well as hands-on guidance from a trainer. Trainers should be selected based on their credentials and screened to ensure they use reinforcement-based training techniques. Positive punishment−based techniques should not be used in training, because at best they serve only to suppress undesirable behavior and can lead to fear, avoidance, and even aggression. Management issues include inappropriate play (eg, nipping or mouthing of people); unruly behavior (eg, pulling, lunging, jumping up, mounting, overactivity); and some forms of barking, destructive behaviors, and housesoiling. If the problem is determined to be an emotional disorder or abnormal behavior, resolution will require a combination of behavior modification techniques, modifications to the environment to prevent further problems, and medications to help reestablish a more normal mental state and facilitate new learning ( see Treatment of Behavioral Problems Treatment of Behavioral Problems In production animals, treatment focuses on group management, environmental or housing modifications, and in some cases removing individual animals out of or to other groups. Specifics are covered... read more ). Fears and Phobias Fear is a normal response to an actual or perceived threatening stimulus or situation. Anxiety is a response to fear and agitation, or apprehension when the animal anticipates a threat or fearful situation. Phobia is an exaggerated fear response ( see Phobia: Phobia: These activities show dysfunction in action and behavior. Alternatively, the terms behavior problem, behavior pathology, mental health disorder, or emotional disorders might be used. By comparison... read more ). The fear response may include panting and salivation, tucked tail, lowered ears, gazing away, low body posture, piloerection, vocalization, or displacement behaviors such as yawning or lip licking. While avoidance and escape is one strategy, some dogs use aggression to remove the fear-evoking stimulus and are reinforced by success (negative reinforcement). Some of the more common presentations include the following: 1) fear of other dogs, especially those that are unfamiliar, appear threatening to the dog, or with which the dog has had an unpleasant experience; 2) fear of unfamiliar people, especially those who are novel or look, act, or smell different than those the dog is accustomed to (eg, young children); 3) fear of inanimate stimuli such as loud or unfamiliar noises (eg, construction work, trucks, gunshot), visual stimuli (eg, umbrellas, hats, uniforms), environments (eg, backyard, park, boarding kennel), surfaces (eg, grass, tile or wood floors, steps), or a combination of stimuli (eg, vacuum cleaners, car rides); and 4) fear of specific situations such as veterinary clinics or grooming parlors. Some dogs have a more generalized anxiety, in which the fearful reaction is displayed in a wide range of situations to which a “normal” pet would be unlikely to react. Although there can be a genetic component to fear and anxiety, prenatal and neonatal stressors, including maternal separation, lack of socialization (ie, unfamiliarity), or a previous unpleasant outcome during encounters with the stimulus (or similar stimuli), can also be causative factors. Phobic responses in dogs are generally associated with loud noises (eg, thunder, fireworks, gunshots) and the stimuli associated with these events, including rain, lightning, and perhaps even static or pressure changes associated with a thunderstorm. Some fears (eg, veterinary clinics, going outdoors, entering certain rooms, or walking on certain types of flooring) may become so intense that they meet the definition of a phobia. Separation Anxiety: It is estimated that ~14% of dogs have separation anxiety, or an inability of the pet to find comfort when separated from family members. The problem may be primary (eg, hyperattachment, dysfunctional attachment) as the puppy ages and matures; in fact, the chances of the problem developing can be reduced by having puppies regularly spend time during the day on their own (preferably in a safe haven). In other cases, the anxiety about being left alone is secondary to an event such as a change in the household or dog's daily routine, or associated with an underlying state of anxiety along with other behavioral issues such as noise phobias and separation anxiety. Anxiety may lead to destructive behavior (particularly at exits or toward owner possessions), distress vocalization, housesoiling, salivation, pacing, restlessness, inability to settle, anorexia, and repetitive or compulsive behaviors. The behaviors are exhibited when the dog is left alone and generally arise within the first 15–30 min after departure. A video recording can be an invaluable diagnostic aid to visualize the behavior and determine whether there are other concurrent signs of anxiety (autonomic stimulation, increased motor activity, and increased vigilance and scanning). The diagnosis requires that other common causes of the signs be excluded (eg, incomplete housetraining, exploratory play and scavenging, external stimuli leading to arousal and anxiety, noise aversion, or confinement anxiety). Many pets with separation anxiety begin to exhibit signs as the owner prepares to depart (eg, putting on shoes, getting keys, going to the door). When the owner is home, the dog may crave constant contact or proximity to the owner. When the owner returns, the welcoming responses are commonly exaggerated and the dog is hard to calm down. Abnormal Repetitive Behaviors Abnormal repetitive behaviors may actually comprise a number of conditions with different pathogeneses, including compulsive disorders, stereotypies, neurologic disorders, and other forms of behavioral pathology. Therefore, until a diagnosis is made, the term abnormal repetitive behavior may better describe the clinical presentation. Compulsive disorders may be repetitive, stereotypic, locomotory, grooming, ingestive, or hallucinogenic behaviors that occur out of context to the time and situation in which they take place, and occur in a frequency or duration that is excessive. There may be lack of control over onset or termination. Although it can be debated whether animals can obsess, they do perceive and experience concern; therefore, the term obsessive-compulsive has also been used to describe this disorder. The diagnosis should start with a description and observation of the behavior, including video recordings if necessary. Because there is likely a genetic component for many compulsive disorders, the signalment and age of onset is also important. For example, German Shepherds and Bull Terriers are known to spin or tail chase, while a genetic locus for flank sucking has been identified in Doberman Pinschers. The problem may first arise as a displacement behavior when the dog is frustrated, conflicted, or highly aroused. Lack of predictability in the daily routine, alterations in the environment, unpredictable consequences, lack of sufficient outlets for normal behaviors, and chronic or recurrent anxiety might be initiating factors. At this point, if the owners can teach appropriate acceptable alternative responses (eg, sitting before greeting or play as an alternative to spinning) and provide constructive alternatives (eg, feeding from toys), the problem might be resolved. However, as the frequency or intensity increases, the behavior may become compulsive. The diagnosis is considered to be a compulsive disorder when the behavior interferes with normal function or when it becomes independent of (or emancipated from) the inciting stimulus. There is likely altered serotonin transmission. Stereotypies are defined as repetitive behaviors that are unvaried in sequence and have no obvious purpose or function. They may arise when the environment lacks sufficient outlets for the dog to engage in normal behaviors, or when caused by maternal deprivation or as a result of a neurologic disorder. It is possible that stereotypic behaviors, at least in their early stages, may provide a coping mechanism for the pet. Stereotypies might be induced by dopaminergic stimulation. Although most dogs respond to drugs that inhibit serotonin reuptake including the SSRIs and clomipramine, alterations in other neurotransmitters may play a role, eg, dopamine, endorphins, N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA). Because medical problems might be the cause of the signs, these should first be excluded. In cases in which the physical examination, history, and diagnostic testing do not clearly identify the cause, a therapeutic response trial might be indicated (eg, anticonvulsants to exclude focal seizures as a cause of fly snapping or light chasing; clomipramine or fluoxetine to exclude compulsive disorders). Also see Table: Clinical Presentation and Medical Differentials for Compulsive Disorders Clinical Presentation and Medical Differentials for Compulsive Disorders . Table Aggression Aggression is the most common problem in referral practices across North America, approximating 70% of the caseload. It is also a major human concern, because at least 5 million people are referred to the hospital each year in the USA alone for treatment of dog bites. Most forms of aggression, except for predation, are distance-increasing behavior (ie, the dog is attempting to actively increase the distance between itself and the stimulus). There are many types of aggressive behaviors with different motivations; however, fear, anxiety, conflict (uncertainty), genetics, and learned responses generally play a role in most cases; however, in some cases the behavior may be abnormal or pathologic. The effects of early development (prenatal, postnatal), socialization, and previous experience all play a role in development of aggression. Aggression refers to threatening behavior or harmful attacks and can range from subtle changes in body posture, facial expressions, and vocalization to biting. Dogs that are easily aroused are at high risk of aggression, because their decision-making is affected by their physiologic state (ie, flight or fight). For treatment to be effective, the pet’s anxiety and arousal must first be managed by avoiding situations or staying below the threshold at which aggression might arise. Some or all of a combination of reward-based training, behavior products that can help to better manage the pet, and medications to help achieve a behavioral state most conducive to new learning is required to successfully modify the behavior to achieve desirable outcomes and countercondition the pet to the stimuli that incite aggression. Before treating aggression, the practitioner must assess the potential risk of injury. All stimuli that might incite aggression should be accurately identified to ensure initial safety. Predictability is a critical issue in prognosis, both to prevent further incidents and to develop a stimulus gradient for treatment. The signalment, environment, history, and target of the aggression also provide invaluable information as to whether the problem might be safely and effectively managed. The type of aggression is an additional factor: some can be managed and improved, whereas others require prevention. Finally, the clinician must assess the ability of the owner to effectively and safely prevent the problem. Aggression that is unpredictable, arises during relatively benign interactions, involves targets that cannot realistically avoid exposure to the aggressive dog (eg, young children, other household pets), or is performed by a large dog or in an uninhibited manner worsens the prognosis. Any medical condition that might cause or contribute to aggression must be identified, because they are important factors in diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. (See www.esvce.org for risk assessment guidelines.) Fear-related Aggression: Fear is the underlying cause of most forms of canine aggression. It is triggered by a stimulus that is threatening to the dog. When the aggression is a direct response to a challenge or confrontation, it might be referred to as defensive aggression. Fearful dogs may try to avoid the stimulus but become aggressive if they cannot escape (eg, leashed, confined, cornered, or physically grasped), are motivated to maintain their place (eg, on property, between the owner and stimulus, near food or toy), or if they learn that aggression is successful at removing the threat. Inadequate socialization, learning, genetics (temperament), reinforcement of aggressive behavior (eg, retreat of the stimulus), and associating a negative outcome with the stimulus (eg, punishment) can all lead to the development of fear-related aggression. The diagnosis is based on identifying signs of fear as well as the history beginning with the first event, because dogs can exhibit fear at the initial exposure but with time may display a more offensive form of aggression (without threats) when they learn it can be successful. (For treatment of fear-related and other types of aggression, see Treatment of Fears, Phobias, Anxiety, and Aggression Treatment of Fears, Phobias, Anxiety, and Aggression When behavior of dogs is undesirable, there are three levels of consideration: 1) Behaviors within the normal range for the species, age, and breed. In these cases, the owners need guidance... read more .) Possessive Aggression (Resource Guarding): Possessive aggression is most likely to arise when a person or an animal approaches the dog while it is in possession of something it wants to retain. Pets in the process of ingesting or chewing an object might be more likely to display aggression, but the behavior can also be seen in dogs near an object. Aggression is most commonly displayed when in possession of highly motivating food, treats, chew toys, stolen items, or even sleeping places. While genetics and early experience play a role in development, the relative value of the object to the pet and the threat of losing the object to another dog or person determine whether the pet is likely to be possessive. Items that are novel or scarce may be more desirable. Fear and defensive behavior also play a role if the owners threaten, punish, or confront the pet when it takes an object or has it in its mouth. The dog may also learn that it can successfully retain the object with aggression. The problem might be prevented by tossing the puppy high-value treats whenever the owner approaches or passes by the food bowl, and by offering a high-value treat or toy whenever the puppy voluntarily gives up another toy or chew. Food bowls, toys, and chews should not be removed by confrontation, because this can contribute to an increase in anxiety and aggression when approached. In adult dogs, the problem should be managed by preventing access to these items or confining the dog when it is given items over which it might be possessive and by training the dog to give and drop on cue (beginning with items of low value for high-value rewards). If safety is an issue (ie, the dog may hurt itself by chewing on the item), it may be possible to trade the object for one of higher value. Providing more toys and multiple small meals (eg, in feeding toys) may reduce the value and novelty of the resource. Play Aggression: Aggressive play is a normal puppy behavior, which may persist into adulthood as a result of genetics, neotinization, and learning. When puppies play aggressively with other puppies, they may nip and bite but will generally resolve the conflicts among themselves. However, if the problem becomes excessive, owner intervention may be required to redirect the dog’s activities into other forms of play (eg, feeding toys) or to interrupt the behavior with commands or a leash and head halter. If play with people escalates to biting, the interaction can be immediately stopped (negative punishment) and resumed when oral play ceases (positive reinforcement). Alternatively, a leash and head halter or verbal distraction ("off") can be used to interrupt play biting. In all interactions, the puppy should be taught to sit before given anything of value (eg, food, toys, affection). In addition, the puppy should be engaged in regular alternative acceptable forms of play, including fetch, tug games, and manipulation and chew toys. Punishment should not be used to stop play, because it can lead to fear of the owner, defensive aggression, or conflict-induced aggression, or serve as inadvertent reinforcement for some puppies. Redirected Aggression: Aggression is directed toward a third party when the dog is prevented or unable to exhibit aggression to its primary target. This type of aggression is most commonly described when the dog bites the owner as he or she grasps or restrains the dog when trying to prevent or break up a dog fight. Similarly, dogs that might be aggressive toward a veterinarian might bite the person restraining the dog. Redirected aggression arises as a result of the frustration or interruption of other forms of aggression or arousal. Irritable/Conflict/Impulse Control Aggression: Aggression directed toward family members is often mislabeled as dominance or status-related aggression. However, aggression toward family members generally arises from fearful or defensive behaviors, resource guarding, redirected behavior, or situations of conflict (competing emotional states and unpredictable consequences). In some dogs, the problem may be traced back to the owner’s attempts to inhibit excessive play aggression (see above). When a dog successfully uses aggression to achieve a goal (retaining a resource) or remove a threat, the pet learns that aggression is successful (negative reinforcement). If the owner continues to threaten, confront, challenge, or punish the pet, some dogs may inhibit their responses, but a large proportion become more aggressively defensive. When dogs are resting or sleeping, chewing on a favored object, or no longer desirous of human affection, they may respond with either deferent displays or threats. However, if the owner continues to approach, tries to remove the resource, or attempts to pet the dog despite its signaling, aggression may escalate and future signaling may be lost. The owner-pet relationship can quickly deteriorate as the dog becomes more wary and defensive while the owner becomes more fearful and/or confrontational. Genetic factors and early experience likely also play a role; many of these dogs are easily aroused, excessively fearful, or may have emotional disorders or behavioral pathology (see below). Other cases are primarily a result of learning. Aggression when grabbing the collar or during bathing, nail trimming, or ear cleaning is a defensive response. Interrupting a pet that is aroused may lead to redirected aggression. Therefore, when a dog is presented for aggression toward family members, it can be difficult to determine the dog’s underlying motivation because each incident has added to prior learning, fear conditioning, and underlying conflict. Dominance might refer to the relationship between two individuals of the same species within a social group, as described by actions, interactions, and intraspecific communication/signaling. These relationships are not established by aggression of the dominant individual but rather by the deferent signaling of others. Relationships between species, particularly dogs and people, are established through early socialization, the personality of the individual, and what it learns from its observations and interactions with family members. Physical techniques intended to assert dominance (eg, pinning, rolling over) and verbal discipline (yelling "no") are therefore ill advised and can result in fear, anxiety, and further aggression. Dogs with impulse control aggression may respond with aggression to relatively benign interactions with family members. In some lines of English Cocker Spaniels and English Springer Spaniels, this aggression is associated with alterations in serotonin in blood samples or CSF. When aggression is excessive, unpredictable, and disproportionate to the level of threat, safety is a serious concern and the prognosis generally guarded. However, when behavior is abnormal or pathologic, substantial improvement might be achieved with a combination of drugs (eg, SSRIs) and behavior modification. Aggression Toward Other Dogs: Dogs in the same group or household usually avoid conflict without aggression. Communication is based on dominant and submissive signals, with the deference of one of the two individuals to avoid escalation of the encounter. Dominance is a relative concept—the dog that displays deferent signaling may vary between resources and situations. Aggression between individuals living in the same household is generally an abnormal behavior caused by fear and anxiety, redirected aggression, impulse dyscontrol, or poor intraspecific communication skills as a result of genetics or lack of early socialization and compounded by experience and learning. Redirected aggression and competition over a valued resource may also lead to aggression between dogs in the home. Owners may play a role by inadvertently supporting or encouraging a dog during an encounter in which it would normally defer. Age or illness may also play a role, if the way in which one dog signals or responds to the other is altered. Male-to-male aggression may have underlying hormonal factors that can be improved by neutering; however, learning may play a role in maintaining aggression. If any situations arise in which the dogs are unable to resolve conflicts without aggression or injury, behavioral guidance should be sought. Aggression toward unfamiliar dogs and those that are not members of the family group are likely fearful, possessive, protective, or territorial. Territorial/Protective Aggression: Aggression may be displayed when the dog is approached in its territory. Territory can be stationary (eg, yard, home) or mobile (eg, car). What defines the behavior as territorial is that the dog does not display fear to similar stimuli when outside its territory. Fear, anxiety, defensive, and possessive behaviors may all be components, because the pet is most likely to display the behavior toward unfamiliar stimuli, and the motivation to escape or avoid (flight) is decreased or absent when the pet is on its own property. Learning (negative reinforcement when the stimulus retreats) and fear conditioning (unpleasant outcomes such as yelling, discipline, and confinement) can also play a role. Predatory Aggression: This is one of the most dangerous types of aggression, because there is usually no warning. The attack is intended to kill prey, and the bite is uninhibited. The sequence of events may include stalking, chasing, biting, and killing. Young children and babies may be at risk because their size and behaviors mimic those of prey. Although extensive socialization to a species might reduce predation toward that species, the behavior may be enhanced when predatory individuals are together in a group. Predation is a normal and dangerous canine behavior; thus, any dog that exhibits the behavior must be prevented from opportunities to repeat it. Pain-induced and Medical Causes of Aggression: Any disease that causes pain or increases irritability (eg, dental disease, arthritis, trauma, allergies) can lead to aggression. The dog may become aggressive when it is handled or anticipates handling. Organ dysfunction (eg, renal, hepatic), CNS disease, and endocrinopathies (eg, hyperadrenocorticism, functional testicular and ovarian tumors, and thyroid dysfunction) might also contribute to irritability and aggression. (Also see Table: Medical Causes of Behavioral Signs Medical Causes of Behavioral Signs .) While hypothyroidism is more likely associated with lethargy, dermatologic signs, and heat seeking in the early stages, it has been suggested that dogs might display an increase in aggression, particularly toward family members. Treatment should likely be reserved for cases in which diagnostic tests are also consistent with hypothyroidism, because excessive supplementation could lead to a hyperthyroid state (with associated medical and behavioral consequences). Treating the medical problem may resolve the aggression, but the behavior, once learned, may persist. Maternal Aggression: Maternal aggression may be seen in intact females with a litter of puppies or in females with pseudocyesis. It can be directed toward people or other animals. Signs of aggression arise when the bitch’s puppies or toys that mimic puppies are protected, and the aggression should resolve when the hormonal state returns to normal and/or the puppies are weaned. The term maternal aggression has also been used to describe the aggression or cannibalism directed toward the puppies by the bitch. Although the problem may have a genetic component, it is reported to occur more frequently after a first litter. Ovariohysterectomy can prevent further incidents. Treatment of Fears, Phobias, Anxiety, and Aggression Before implementing specific therapy to manage, improve, or resolve a behavior problem, some common elements that apply to most cases should be considered. The initial discussion should focus on 1) an understanding of normal behavior as it relates to the problem, 2) learning to read canine body language and facial expressions, 3) ensuring that all of the dog’s needs are adequately being met, 4) reviewing the principles of learning and reinforcement-based training (predictable consequences), and 5) managing both the environment and the dog to prevent further incidents. The cause, diagnosis, and motivation behind the behavior should be reviewed. Finally, the owner should be given a prognosis with realistic expectations for both short- and longterm outcomes. In most cases, treatment focuses on changing the dog’s emotional response with the stimulus (counterconditioning) and/or replacing the undesirable response with one that is desirable using reinforcement-based techniques (response substitution). However, dogs that are highly aroused respond with autonomic fight-or-flight responses and tend to make reflexive responses. Therefore, arousal must be reduced before treatment can proceed. This can be achieved by training the dog to settle on cue, by minimizing the intensity of the stimulus during exposure (desensitization), or by using management devices such as head halters that can change the dog’s focus and help it to settle, and with drugs or natural products that reduce anxiety and behavioral pathology. Early intervention with medication may be necessary to achieve success and can be in the best interest of the fearful, anxious, or phobic dog. There are common elements to the treatment of fear, anxiety, phobias, and most types of aggression. The first step in the treatment program is to identify each situation stimulus or interaction in which the problem might arise, so that a preventive program can first be implemented. Prevention ensures safety (eg, in aggression cases), prevents further damage to the household or injury to the dog, avoids further anxiety-evoking situations for the dog, and ensures no further aggravation of the problem through fear conditioning (ie, unpleasant outcomes) and learning (ie, negative reinforcement if the stimulus retreats). Prevention can be most effectively achieved by identifying and avoiding any situation in which the dog might be exposed to the stimulus. A leash and head harness, leash and body harness, or verbal commands (when effective) can also prevent access to the stimulus. If avoidance cannot be ensured and aggression is a possibility, then a basket muzzle might be the best alternative. A common starting point to begin to reduce anxiety, improve communication and training, teach self-control, and allow the dog to control its consequences/outcomes is to establish a program of structured interactions in which the dog is not given anything it values (or wants) until it sits (or lies down). If the owners' response is consistent and predictable by ensuring the dog sits (or lies down) every time a treat (food or toy) is given, the leash is attached, the dog goes in and out of the door or car, or the dog wants affection, the dog will soon learn that the sit or down action is required to get the reward, at which point gradually longer and more relaxed responses can be taught. This is sometimes termed structured interactions, predictable consequences, learn to earn, or “saying please.” Because the ultimate goal is to successfully expose the dog to controlled levels of the stimuli while achieving calm and positive outcomes, it is necessary to determine what behaviors need to be trained to achieve desirable outcomes during exposure training. For example, if problems arise indoors, the dog may first need to learn a focused sit, a relaxed down, and a mat command (or other location such as room or crate). A drop or give command and a come or recall may also need to be trained. When problems arise outdoors, sit and focus or down and settle may also be useful, but loose leash walking, backing up, or turning and walking away may be the best options for stimulus exposure. These behaviors should be learned reliably and consistently in a variety of environments with a minimum of distractions before the owners proceed to a graduated stimulus exposure ( see Counterconditioning and Desensitization: Counterconditioning and Desensitization: In production animals, treatment focuses on group management, environmental or housing modifications, and in some cases removing individual animals out of or to other groups. Specifics are covered... read more and see Response Substitution: Response Substitution: In production animals, treatment focuses on group management, environmental or housing modifications, and in some cases removing individual animals out of or to other groups. Specifics are covered... read more ). By identifying a range (gradient) of the dog’s most favored rewards, the most desirable can be used for training and shaping new behaviors that approximate the final goal; less-motivating rewards can then be used to ensure immediacy and timing of previously learned commands. In addition, a way to minimize and control the intensity of the stimulus will also need to be designed (eg, volume, distance, location). Exposure exercises can then be implemented by setting up situations in which high-value rewards are used to reinforce the desired behavior and condition a positive response during exposure to low-intensity stimuli and gradually proceeding through more intense stimuli. Setbacks can be avoided by determining the level of stimulus intensity at which a calm and positive outcome can be achieved and reinforced, and with the use of management devices such as a head halter (sit, reorient head, turn and walk away) or front control body harness (turn away from the situation) to ensure safety and success. Drugs and natural therapeutics might be used concurrently in dogs with excessively intense or abnormal behaviors to enable the successful implementation of behavior modification. For noise phobias, controlled exposure can best be achieved through recordings that can be gradually increased after each successful session of desensitization and counterconditioning. Concurrent behavioral management to reduce stimuli (with sound proofing, ear covers, eye covers, crate covers, or white noise) and develop a safe haven to help the dog settle might also help the dog to cope. For separation anxiety, once a regular routine of play, exercise, and training is established, any additional reinforcement should focus on shaping gradually longer inattention sessions when the dog rests or occupies itself with favored chew and food- or treat-filled toys, ideally in a comfortable safe haven (bed, crate, or room) where the owners can house the dog while gradually increasing their time away. Any attention- or affection-soliciting behavior should be ignored, unless the dog is sitting or lying down calmly (sit for all interactions) or resting on its bed or mat. Visual and auditory cues that signal departure should be avoided if possible; alternatively, they can be decoupled from departure by exposing the dog while remaining home, and associating with play and treats (counterconditioning). In addition to preventive and environmental management strategies and behavior modification, drugs or natural therapeutics can be used to reduce underlying fear, anxiety, arousal, reactivity, or impulse dyscontrol to help facilitate learning; to improve underlying behavioral pathology; and in many cases to improve the behavioral well-being of the dog. For impulsivity, generalized anxiety disorders, excessive stimulus anxiety, and phobias, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are commonly used. Because fluoxetine has been evaluated in and licensed for dogs, it is generally the first choice of the SSRIs, although fluvoxamine, sertraline, paroxetine, and citalopram might be alternatives when fluoxetine is insufficiently effective or adverse effects such as anorexia are an issue. SSRIs are also used to treat compulsive disorders. Among the TCAs, clomipramine is licensed for use in dogs and is an alternative to fluoxetine for the treatment of anxiety disorders and phobias. Because clomipramine is the most selective of the TCAs to inhibit serotonin reuptake, it could be used for compulsive disorders, as an alternative to SSRIs. Other TCAs might be selected for their more potent antihistaminic effects (eg, doxepin, amitriptyline), whereas imipramine has been used as an aid in improving sphincter control with behavioral incontinence. Although the full effect might not be achieved for 3–4 wk, some effect might be noted in the first week. For some compulsive disorders, especially those in which there is a self-traumatic component, gabapentin or carbamazepine might be used concurrently, whereas in those cases in which focal seizures might be causing the behavioral signs, levetiracetam, phenobarbital, or potassium bromide might be used in a therapeutic response trial. When an anxiety-evoking event can be predicted (eg, thunderstorms, fireworks, owner departure, visit to the veterinarian, car ride, exposure to dogs or strangers on a walk, visitors coming to the home), a benzodiazepine can be given with the antidepressant ~1 hr before the event. Because benzodiazepines have variable effects and relatively short half-lives, their efficacy, dose, and duration should be determined in advance of their therapeutic use. Clonidine, trazodone, or propranolol are other options that might be used adjunctively with SSRIs ~1 hr before an expected fear-evoking event (eg, thunder, fireworks, owner departure). In some refractory anxiety cases, trazodone, clonidine, a benzodiazepine such as clonazepam, or perhaps gabapentin might be used concurrently with an SSRI. Buspirone, a nonsedating anxiolytic, is another option for ongoing use. Caution should be exercised when using anxiolytics, because some may disinhibit fearful dogs, which could lead to increased confidence and aggression. Selegiline, which is licensed in North America for treatment of cognitive dysfunction syndrome in dogs, is also licensed for treatment of emotional disorders or chronic anxiety in Europe. Natural products might be used alone or adjunctively with drugs or other natural products to help calm or reduce anxiety, although evidence of efficacy is more limited. A number of studies support the use of pheromone therapy. Adaptil™ simulates the intermammary-appeasing pheromones produced by the lactating bitch and is available as a spray, diffuser, or collar. Pheromones have been used for anxiety associated with car rides, veterinary visits, separation anxiety, storm and fireworks aversions, and to reduce the stress of adoption and aid socialization. A calming or anxiety-modulating effect has been reported for alpha-casozepine (Zylkene®, a milk protein hydrolysate), Harmonease® (containing Magnolia officinalis and Phellodendron amurense), l-theanine (Anxitane®) and Sin-Susto™ (a Souroubea plant blend), and aromatherapy (with lavender). In addition, studies with l-tryptophan in combination with a low-protein diet have demonstrated a possible reduction in some forms of aggression. A commercial diet also has been developed that combines l-tryptophan and alpha-casozepine (Royal Canin Calm®) that might aid in reducing stress and anxiety. Hyperactivity Although hyperactivity or attention deficit disorder has been poorly documented in dogs, there have been published cases studies of dogs with excessive motor activity and an altered ability to acquire new tasks (learn), sometimes accompanied by stereotypic behaviors. It may be particularly difficult to train such dogs to behaviorally settle. There may also be signs of sympathetic activity even at rest (eg, increased heart and respiratory rate, vasodilation). Affected dogs may respond to treatment with methylphenidate. If no improvement with an initial dose of 0.25–0.5 mg/kg, bid, the dosage can be gradually increased every few days to a maximum of ~2 mg/kg until a measurable therapeutic response is seen (reduced motor activity, heart rate, respiratory rate, repetitive activities), provided no adverse effects develop. Differential diagnoses include impulse control disorders that might respond to SSRI therapy, and normal behaviors in dogs with behavioral needs that are not being adequately met. In fact, it can be quite challenging to meet these needs in some breeds and individuals, depending on the home and family. Destructive Behaviors Many of the destructive behaviors, including chewing, stealing, garbage raiding, and digging, are normal exploratory behaviors that arise when the dog is unsupervised and not otherwise engaged in more desirable activities. A regular daily routine with sufficient reward training, exercise, and social enrichment can help to ensure that these behaviors do not arise when the owners are home, although varying degrees of supervision may be required. When the owners cannot supervise the dog, it should be provided with adequate outlets for exploratory play in the form of chews, food-stuffed toys, or manipulation toys, or in the case of outdoor dogs, perhaps even a designated area for digging. These dogs may also need to be confined away from the areas in which problems might arise or housed in crates, pens, or runs to prevent access to potential targets of destruction. Some dogs engage in destructive behaviors because of anxiety (eg, separation anxiety, confinement, noise phobias). Together with the history, videotaping or camera monitoring is generally the best way to diagnose behavior problems that occur when the owner is absent, as well as assess response to treatment. Eating Disorders Behavioral problems related to ingestion include those in which food intake is excessive (polyphagia), inadequate (hyporexia), or too fast (gorging); water intake is excessive (polydipsia); and nonfood items (pica) or feces (coprophagia) are eaten. Medical causes should be excluded first. Some dogs that scavenge do so as a normal component of food acquisition and are reinforced by success. Coprophagia may occasionally have a medical cause, but normal maternal behavior includes consumption of feces and urine of young puppies. In addition, as part of exploratory behavior, many dogs are attracted to and may ingest feces, compost, and prey (dead or live). Similarly, although some dogs with pica and polyphagia have compulsive disorders, many dogs, especially puppies, begin to chew and ingest nonfood items as part of investigative and exploratory behavior. Dogs with hyporexia may have an anxiety disorder, and some may develop specific taste preferences and aversions that reduce what they will eat. Many feeding problems can be improved through a work-for-food program in which dogs are given food as reinforcers for training, with the balance placed inside toys that require chewing or manipulation to release the food. This encourages exploration, makes feeding an enjoyable, time-consuming, and mentally challenging activity, and can limit the quantity consumed and prevent gorging. As with most behavior problems, correcting feeding problems needs to be accompanied by management strategies to prevent access to potential targets at any time the dog cannot be supervised or actively engaged in other chew and play behaviors. Elimination Behavioral Problems Housesoiling: Dogs may soil in inappropriate locations because of inadequate or insufficient training, as a marking behavior, or as a result of fear or anxiety. However, pain, sensory decline, cerebrocortical disease including cognitive dysfunction, or any medical condition that leads to increased volume, more frequent elimination, pain on elimination, or lack of control, must first be excluded as potential causes or contributing factors. A detailed behavioral history is necessary to determine whether the dog has ever been housetrained. If not, a housetraining regimen should be reviewed in which the focus is solely on reinforcement of elimination in desirable locations rather than punishment of elimination in inappropriate locations. This requires the owner to accompany the dog to its elimination area (eg, outdoors), reinforce elimination, supervise the dog indoors to prevent or interrupt any attempts at elimination (perhaps with the aid of a leash to ensure continuous supervision), and return the dog to its elimination site at appropriate intervals or if there are signs that the dog is ready to eliminate (eg, sniffing, heading to the door, sneaking away). When the owner is not able to supervise, a combination of scheduling (ensuring that the dog eliminates before departure and having someone return to take the dog to its elimination area before it must eliminate) and confinement training/prevention are required. Dogs can either be confined away from areas where they might eliminate or kept in an area where they will not eliminate, such as a pen, room, or crate, where the dog eats, plays, or sleeps. Alternatively, the dog can be provided with an indoor elimination area (eg, paper, indoor puppy potty) within its confinement area where it can relieve itself when the owner is gone. Puppies obtained from pet stores or any location where they have been extensively caged may be more difficult to housetrain, because they have never had to inhibit elimination and may have learned to play with or eat feces. Marking Behavior: Although marking is most often seen in intact males as a form of social and olfactory communication, it is also seen in females (especially when in heat) and in neutered males and females, often as an overmarking of other odors (eg, where other pets have urinated, or on items such as blankets with the residual odor of other dogs, people, or cats). Some dogs will mark when they visit unfamiliar households, especially when another dog’s odor is present. There is often a typical posture of a raised or partially raised leg when the surface to be marked is vertical. Fecal marking is uncommon. Although marking is likely a component of normal communication, it is unacceptable when it occurs indoors. Neutering intact males will reduce the behavior, and good supervision can prevent or inhibit most marking. As with housesoiling, dogs should be confined away from areas that might be marked when owners are not able to supervise. Marking that is related to anxiety may be reduced by identifying and treating the cause, perhaps with the aid of drugs or natural products that reduce anxiety. Excitement, Submission, and Conflict-related Elimination: Dogs may eliminate when they are overly excited, such as when greeting people. Some dogs will urinate when showing submissive postures (eg, crouching to the ground or turning over to expose the belly) or when highly aroused. Because loss of urine control may be associated with a concurrent desire to both greet and show deferential behavior, many cases may be due to conflicting behavioral motivations. Treatment should focus on avoiding the stimuli (reaching, approach, eye contact) that incite the behavior and avoiding any punishment during greeting, which would add to fear and conflict behaviors. Acceptable alternative behaviors that are incompatible with excitable greeting or deferent postures can be taught, such as a relaxed sit, or any game or “trick” the pet may have learned such as fetch or giving a paw. Phenylpropanolamine might increase sphincter control, whereas imipramine may improve control and reduce anxiety. Other Elimination Disorders: Dogs with separation anxiety or other fears and phobias (eg, thunderstorm phobia, firework phobia) may soil during these times. Aging and Cognitive Dysfunction The aging process is associated with progressive and irreversible changes in body systems that can affect behavior ( see Medical Causes of Behavioral Signs Medical Causes of Behavioral Signs and see Medical Causes of Behavioral Signs Medical Causes of Behavioral Signs ). In older dogs, these might include hepatic or renal failure, endocrine disorders (eg, Cushing disease), pain, sensory decline, or any disease affecting the CNS (eg, tumors) or circulation (eg, anemia, hypertension). To diagnose the cause of behavioral signs in a geriatric dog, a detailed history, physical examination, neurologic evaluation, and diagnostic tests are required to exclude potential medical causes of the presenting signs. Many owners do not report these signs, perhaps because the owners think they are insignificant or assume little can be done. Yet in one study, 30% of dogs 11–12 yr old and nearly 70% of dogs 15–16 yr old had signs consistent with cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CDS). A more recent Internet survey estimated CDS in 14.2% of dogs >10 yr old, with prevalence increasing with age, but >85% of these had not been diagnosed. It is therefore essential that owners be informed of the importance of reporting signs when they arise and for veterinarians to take a proactive approach in asking owners about behavior at each visit. Early detection provides the best opportunity to improve signs and slow the decline of cognitive function. Aging dogs may exhibit a decline in cognitive function (memory, learning, perception, awareness) that manifests as one or more of a group of clinical signs. These are sometimes referred to by the acronym DISHA and include disorientation, interactions, sleep-wake cycles, housesoiling, and activity changes (which may be decreased or increased and repetitive). In addition, anxiety, agitation, and altered responses to stimuli are frequently reported. The first and most prominent sign of brain aging is a decline in learning or memory, which is generally impractical for pet owners to assess. However, neuropsychologic testing of older dogs has documented memory decline beginning at 6–8 yr of age and learning deficits by 9 yr of age. CDS in dogs is analogous to the early stages of Alzheimer disease in people, both in clinical signs and brain pathology. As with people, some dogs show minimal to no clinical impairment with age, whereas others develop varying degrees of deficits. Treatment should first focus on environmental enrichment (both physical and mental stimulation), which has been shown to slow cognitive decline and improve the signs of CDS. Selegiline is a monoamine oxidase B inhibitor that may improve the signs of CDS by enhancing dopamine and other catecholamines in the cortex and hippocampus and by decreasing free radical load. Propentofylline, which is licensed in Europe and Australia for the treatment of dullness, lethargy, and depressed demeanor in old dogs, may increase blood flow and inhibit platelet aggregation and thrombus formation. A number of natural products, including diets and supplements, have also been shown to have beneficial effects in improving the signs and potentially slowing cognitive decline. Two such diets are Canine b/d®, which is supplemented with fatty acids, antioxidants, and dl-alpha-lipoic acid and l-carnitine to enhance mitochondrial function, and a specialized Purina One® diet that uses botanic oils containing medium-chain triglycerides to provide ketone bodies as an alternative source of energy for aging neurons. Other natural supplements that have demonstrated efficacy in improving cognitive function include Senilife®, which contains a combination of phosphatidylserine, Ginkgo biloba, resveratrol, and vitamins E and B6; Activait®, which contains phosphatidylserine in combination with α-lipoic acid, carnitine, fatty acids, glutathione, and other antioxidants; S-adenosyl methionine (Novifit®); and apoaequorin (Neutricks®), a calcium-buffering protein found in jellyfish. Copyright © 2023 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved. Social Behavior of Dogs Was This Page Helpful? Yes No Social Behavior of Cats Test your knowledge Take a Quiz! Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA (known as MSD outside of the US and Canada) is dedicated to using leading-edge science to save and improve lives around the world. The Veterinary Manual was first published in 1955 as a service to the community. The legacy of this great resource continues in the online and mobile app versions today. About Disclaimer Permissions Privacy Cookie Settings Terms of use Licensing Contact Us Human Health Manuals Copyright © 2023 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved. TOP IN THIS TOPIC 

honeypot link skip to main content MSD Manual Veterinary Manual The trusted provider of veterinary information since 1955 A A A A A A Species Filter Topics That Apply to All Animals Clear Filter Expand All Amphibians Amphibians-Laboratory Amphibians-Pet Amphibians- Zoo and Wildlife Birds Birds-Pet Birds-ZooandWildlife Cats Cats-Pet Cats-Shelter Cattle Cattle-Beef Cattle-Diary Cattle Dogs Dogs-Pets Dogs-Shelter Ducks Ducks-Productions Ducks-Zoo and Wildlife Exotics Amphibians Amphibians-Laboratory Amphibians-Pet Amphibians- Zoo and Wildlife Birds Birds-Pet Birds-ZooandWildlife primates Primates-Laboratory Primates-Zoo and Wildlife Rabbits Rabbits-Laboratory Rabbits-Pet Rabbits-Wild and Zoolife Reptiles Reptiles-Laboratory Reptiles-Pet Reptiles-ZooAndWildlife Rodents Rodents-Laboratory Rodents-Pet Rodents-Zoo and Wildlife Fish Fish-Aquaculture Fish-Pet Fish-Zoo And Wildlife Goats Horses Llamas and Alpacas Alpacas Lamas Pigs Pigs-Production Pigs-Pet Poultry Chickens-Backyard Ducks-Zoo and Wildlife Poultry-Production Chickens-Production Ducks-Productions Rabbits Rabbits-Laboratory Rabbits-Pet Rabbits-Wild and Zoolife Reptiles Reptiles-Laboratory Reptiles-Pet Reptiles-ZooAndWildlife Rodents Rodents-Laboratory Rodents-Pet Rodents-Zoo and Wildlife Sheep Zoo and Wildlife Amphibians- Zoo and Wildlife Birds-ZooandWildlife Crocodilians Primates-Zoo and Wildlife Reptiles-ZooAndWildlife Rodents-Zoo and Wildlife Apply Cancel Search Enter search terms to find related veterinary topics, multimedia and more. Advanced Search: • Use “ “ for phrases o [ “canine influenza”] • Use – to remove results with certain terms o [pig –guinea] • Use OR to account for alternate terms o [alopecia OR “hair loss” ] Search A-Z HOME VETERINARY CONTENT PET HEALTH & WELLNESS RESOURCES QUIZZES ABOUT Disclaimer Privacy Terms of use Contact Us Human Health Manuals VETERINARY PET A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Veterinary / Dog Owners / Behavior of Dogs / Introduction to Behavior of Dogs / IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Introduction to Behavior of Dogs Diagnosing Behavior Problems in Dogs Behavior Modification in Dogs Normal Social Behavior in Dogs Behavior Problems in Dogs Pet Owner Version Introduction to Behavior of Dogs By Gary M. Landsberg , BSc, DVM, MRCVS, DACVB, DECAWBM, North Toronto Veterinary Behaviour Specialty Clinic Reviewed/Revised Feb 2018 | Modified Oct 2022 Behavioral medicine is the scientific study of everything animals do, whether the animals are insects, birds, mammals, fish, or people. The field of animal behavior is concerned with understanding the causes, functions, development, and evolution of behavior. Behavior refers to the actions or reactions of an organism. Behavior is usually in relation to the environment, and is controlled by the endocrine and nervous systems. The complexity of animal behavior is related to the complexity of its nervous system. Generally, animals with complex nervous systems have a greater capacity to learn new responses and thus adjust their behavior. An animal’s behavior is influenced by many factors. Some of these factors include genetic predisposition, experience and learning, environment, and physiology. Several dog studies have shown that behavior can be inherited to some degree. In addition, maternal influences can affect personality and temperament. If puppies are separated from a fearful mother, the puppies are less likely to be fearful than if they are left with their mother. The effect of other puppies in the litter, the amount and type of human handling, and exposure to new objects and experiences all influence a dog’s behavior. The brain and its associated neurotransmitters also play a fundamental role in temperament and behavior. Abnormal levels of various hormones play a role in certain forms of aggression and fear. Understanding the nature of behavior problems is essential to developing a rational basis for their treatment. While this chapter focuses primarily on the abnormal behavior of dogs, the extent to which a dog’s behavior is abnormal is defined by how much it deviates from “normal” or by the severity of the problem that this behavior poses to its owner. Copyright © 2023 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved. Puppy Care Was This Page Helpful? Yes No Diagnosing Behavior Problems in Dogs Test your knowledge Take a Quiz! Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA (known as MSD outside of the US and Canada) is dedicated to using leading-edge science to save and improve lives around the world. The Veterinary Manual was first published in 1955 as a service to the community. The legacy of this great resource continues in the online and mobile app versions today. About Disclaimer Permissions Privacy Cookie Settings Terms of use Licensing Contact Us Human Health Manuals Copyright © 2023 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved. TOP IN THIS TOPIC 

Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expand/collapse submenu for News National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expand/collapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music Hip-Hop 50 Tiny Desk All Songs Considered Music Features Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured TED Radio Hour Louder Than A Riot It's Been a Minute Life Kit More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop Hip-Hop 50 Tiny Desk All Songs Considered Music Features Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Organization NPR Network Support Careers Connect Press Ethics John Bradshaw On The New Science Of Understanding Dog Behavior Animal behaviorist John Bradshaw has spent much of his career debunking bad advice given to dog owners. His new book Dog Sense details what pet owners should expect from their dogs — and what their dogs should expect in return from their owners. Animals The New Science Of Understanding Dog Behavior May 26, 201111:30 AM ET Heard on Fresh Air The New Science Of Understanding Dog Behavior Listen · 37:49 37:49 Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/136497064/136644713" width="100%" height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Enlarge this image Dr. John Bradshaw is an anthrozoologist and a noted scholar of animal-human interactions. Basic Books hide caption toggle caption Basic Books Dr. John Bradshaw is an anthrozoologist and a noted scholar of animal-human interactions. Basic Books Dog Sense: How the New Science of Dog Behavior Can Make You a Better Friend to Your PetBy John BradshawHardcover, 352 pagesBasic BooksList price: $25.99 Read An Excerpt What's the best advice to give man about respecting man's best friend? Animal behaviorist John Bradshaw says it's realizing that dogs are neither wolves nor furry humans and that dog owners have certain responsibilities to make sure their dogs are psychologically healthy. Bradshaw, who has spent much of his career debunking bad advice given to dog owners, is the author of a new behavior guidebook called Dog Sense: How the New Science of Dog Behavior Can Make You a Better Friend to Your Pet. The book details what pet owners should expect from their dogs and what their dogs should expect in return from their owners. How To Reprimand Your Dog One of the most common problems owners face, says Bradshaw, is knowing what to do when a dog misbehaves. For example, many owners might be inclined to immediately physically reprimand a dog for jumping up on visitors. But Bradshaw says that's the wrong way to teach your pet how to behave because dogs see any form of attention — even negative attention — as a reward. Instead, he says, owners should immediately ignore their pet completely. "Most dogs require their owners' attention [and] they want their owners' attention," he says. "They want people's attention in general. And withdrawing that is a very powerful signal to the dog." Bradshaw recommends folding your arms, looking away and pretending your dog isn't in the same room. Your change in body language will be apparent to your pet. "Then you'll find that quite quickly the dog begins to realize that [their bad behavior] is not working," he says. "You can then use a distraction technique to get the dog to do something else, like sit or lie down and then it will get the idea that this is what it's supposed to do when visitors come to visit." Bradshaw says dogs naturally want to please and play with people, especially the people who love them. "[When a puppy's eyes open it has] a very strong ability to learn about people and ... this behavior persists throughout life," he says. "And surprisingly, most dogs, given the choice, will actually prefer human company to other dog company." Studies indicate that dogs will naturally gravitate toward humans, though Bradshaw says how that idea gets into a dog's developing brain is still somewhat of a mystery. "But they have an exaggerated tendency to learn from anything that people do right from the minute they're capable of doing it," he says. "They're particularly sensitive to human body language — the direction we look in, what our whole body language is telling them, pointing gestures. They are much more sensitive to things like that than almost any other species on the planet." Creating Expectations For Dogs And Owners Bradshaw says humans also expect dogs to be companionable when they're needed and unobtrusive when they're not. City dogs, he says, are expected to be better-behaved than the average human child and as self-reliant as adults. But these expectations, he says, create problems for modern dogs. "Many dogs — maybe as many as half the dogs in the West — that are kept in homes have a real problem with being left alone at some point in their lives," he says. "And the problem may last for weeks or years. ... They crave the company of people. They also have a mind which does not have a particularly good sense of time, so when they get left alone, they can immediately begin to think, 'When's anyone coming back? Have I been abandoned forever?' " Dogs can get extremely anxious as a result, Bradshaw says. But there are bits of training owners can do to help their dogs avoid separation disorders. "You train your dog to toilet outside. You train your dog to sit on command," he says. "You should also train your dog to cope with being left alone." Related NPR Stories Animals Helping Your 'Good Old Dog' Navigate Aging Author Interviews Dog Food, Or Dogs As Food? Depends Where You Are The Two-Way Scientists Reveal How Fast Dogs Must Shake To Dry Their Fur 13.7: Cosmos And Culture The Evolvability Of Dogs: A Journey From Mongrels To Poodles Bradshaw suggests creating a gradual routine when you leave the house: For example, pick up your keys and coat from the same place, in the same way each time you leave. Those behaviors will become triggers for your dog, who will associate them with your impending absence. He also suggests training new dogs by having them become familiar with these actions — and gradually increasing your time away so that your dog has time to become acclimated. "You go to the door. You come back from the door. You put the coat back on the rack. You put the car keys back down on the shelf. Then you do it again, but this time maybe you open the door," he says. "Then the next time, you go outside the door and come straight back in again. And the next time, go outside and stand outside for 10 seconds. And then come back in again. And what the dog learns at that stage ... the association with you going out and you coming home. And that is enough for most dogs to reassure them — and very quickly you find you can leave them for hours. They've learned that association, and you coming back and making a fuss of them, and so the idea of you going out actually becomes pleasurable instead of something to panic." John Bradshaw is the director of the Anthrozoology Institute at the University of Bristol in the U.K. He has studied the behavior of domestic cats and dogs for more than 25 years. Interview Highlights On common misconceptions about wolves "The main [myth] ... is that wolves are essentially an intrinsically aggressive animal that is continuously trying to take over whatever group they find themselves in and dominate it. And the new wolf biology really exposed that as an artifact — that particular view of wolves came from wolves in zoos and in wildlife parks, where a bunch of unrelated wolves were basically put together and told to get on with it and, not surprisingly, they got on with it by being aggressive toward one another. The new picture of wolf society is that wolves are harmonious animals. They live in family groups. They get along really well together, and they're almost never aggressive to one another. The aggression comes out when two families meet, so they have very strong family ties." On playing tug of war with your dog "Let's take a very simple piece of advice that trainers take out, which is you should never allow a dog to go in front of you through a doorway because it will give the signal to the dog that you are submissive and are therefore allowing him or her — the dog — to become dominant. Take another one. Many trainers advise against playing tug of war games because there is a risk the dog will win and the dog, by winning, will think that you are being submissive and he will therefore be able to control you in the future. We've done research into a number of these things — including the tug of war game — and have shown that the premise is just completely not true. If you do let a dog win over and over again at tug of war, it likes you. It wants to play with you more than it did to begin with because it's having fun. If, on the other hand, the dog gets less attracted to you and doesn't so much want to play with you — again, but there's absolutely no change of the dog's behavior outside of that particular situation of play — the dog does not get into its head that you're kind of a soft touch and that in the future it will be able to control you and whatever you do." On breeding "There's still a great genetic variability if you take the dog as a whole. But within a breed, the variation has diminished. So you get all kind of inherited diseases coming up [which are] very difficult to eradicate at the moment while the breed barriers are being maintained." On military dogs "I've been involved with training dogs for the military for about a decade now, so I think everybody but me has been surprised by the dog that went in to find Osama bin Laden. They're very valuable dogs. And I must say, if I was in an environment like that, I would actually much rather have a dog ahead of me than another human being because it's another set of senses — and particularly the olfactory sense. These dogs are trained to find and then indicate all manners of things. In that particular instance, it would presumably be explosives and ammunitions and guns and so on." On dog senses "They're colorblind to a certain extent but colorblind humans are not that badly handicapped. Their hearing is a little bit more sensitive than ours in the high-pitched region. But it's their sense of smell that really distinguishes them from us. And I don't think we really take up too much recognizance of that. I think dogs have a right to sniff things whenever it doesn't cause a problem to us. When I meet a dog, I hold my hand out. I don't stick my fingers right out, just in case, but I just make a loose fist and put my hand out to the dog. If it's a small dog, I'll squat down. And that dog will want to come and sniff my hand and lick it if necessary. That's a greeting, and I think if we don't do that, I think it's as upsetting to the dog as if we were talking to somebody that we never met before and covered our faces at that point in time, as if we were trying to disguise who we were." Dog Sense By John Bradshaw Purchase BookPurchase close overlay Buy Featured Book TitleDog SenseAuthorJohn Bradshaw Your purchase helps support NPR programming. How? Amazon Independent Bookstores Excerpt: 'Dog Sense' Facebook Flipboard Email Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook Instagram Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor MessageBecome an NPR sponsor 

Select Region United States United Kingdom Germany India Australia Italy Canada Credit Cards Credit Cards Credit Cards Compare Credit Cards Best Credit Cards 2023 Credit Card Comparison Best Travel Credit Cards Best Cash Back Credit Cards Best 0% APR Credit Cards Best Balance Transfer Credit Cards Best Rewards Credit Cards Best Airline Credit Cards Best Credit Cards for International Travel Best Credit Cards For Bad Credit Best Student Credit Cards Best Secured Credit Cards Best First Credit Cards Best Credit Cards For No Credit Best Gas Credit Cards Compare Business Cards Best Business Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards For Travel Best Cash Back Business Credit Cards Best 0% APR Business Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards For Startups Credit Card Reviews Capital One Venture X Chase Sapphire Preferred American Express Platinum Chase Sapphire Reserve American Express Gold Wells Fargo Active Cash More Credit Card Reviews Credit Cards By Issuer Best Wells Fargo Credit Cards Best American Express Credit Cards Best Chase Credit Cards Best Capital One Credit Cards Best Discover Credit cards Calculators Credit Card Interest Calculator Balance Transfer Calculator Credit Card Payoff Calculator Credit Score Best Credit Monitoring Services How To Check Your Credit Score What Is A Good Credit Score Credit Repair Best Credit Repair Companies How To Fix Your Credit In 7 Easy Steps How Much Does Credit Repair Cost? Loans Loans Loans Personal Loans Best Personal Loans Personal Loan Rates Compare Personal Loans Best Debt Consolidation Loans Best Low-Interest Personal Loans Best Personal Loans For Fair Credit Best Bad Credit Loans Best Joint Personal Loans Easiest Personal Loans Best Wedding Loans Best Personal Loans For Veterans Student Loans Best Student Loan Refinance Lenders Best Student Loans Best Parent Loan For College Best Low-Interest Student Loans Best Graduate Student Loans Best Medical School Loans Lenders To Refinance Parent PLUS Loans Student Loan Forgiveness FAQ Student Loan Forgiveness Programs Student Loan Calculator Student Loan Refinance Calculator Business Loans Best Business Loans Best Business Lines Of Credit Best Working Capital Loans Best Unsecured Business Loans Best Same-Day Business Loans Best Startup Business Loans Best Business Loans For Bad Credit Fast Approval Business Loans Business Loan Calculator Auto Loans Auto Loan Rates Auto Loan Refinancing Rates Auto Loan Refinancing Lenders Mortgages Mortgages Mortgages Home Buying & Refinancing Best Mortgage Lenders Best Mortgage Refinance Lenders Best Online Mortgage Lenders Best VA Mortgage Lenders Best USDA Mortgage Lenders Best Mortgage Lenders for FHA Loans When Should You Refinance? Mortgage Rates Today's Mortgage Rates Current Mortgage Rates: Compare Today’s Rates Today's Mortgage Refinance Rates Current Mortgage Refinance Rates 30 Year Mortgage Rates 15 Year Mortgage Rates 10 Year Mortgage Rates Today’s VA Mortgage Rates Today’s VA Refinance Rates Historical Mortgage Rates Home Equity Loans Best Home Equity Loan Lenders Best Home Equity Loan Rates Home Equity Loan Calculator Best HELOC Lenders Best HELOC Rates Calculators Mortgage Amortization Calculator Mortgage APR Calculator Cash-Out Refinance Calculator Mortgage Refinance Calculator Mortgage Calculator HELOC Calculator Real Estate How Much House Can I Afford? Calculator Cost of Living Calculator Housing Market Predictions Most Affordable Cities To Buy A Home Insurance Insurance Insurance Car Insurance Best Car Insurance Cheap Car Insurance Online Car Insurance Quotes Car Insurance Calculator Cost Of Car Insurance Best Car Insurance In Florida Best Car Insurance In California Best Car Insurance In Texas Travel Insurance Best Travel Insurance Best Covid Travel Insurance Best Cruise Travel Insurance Cancel For Any Reason Insurance How Much Is Travel Insurance? Cheap Travel Insurance Travel Insurance & Destinations Life Insurance Best Life Insurance Best Term Life Insurance Best Senior Life Insurance No-Exam Life Insurance Compare Life Insurance Quotes How Much Is Life Insurance? Cheap Life Insurance Life Insurance Calculator Homeowners Insurance Best Home Insurance Companies Compare Home Insurance Quotes Home Insurance Calculator Average Cost Of Homeowners Insurance How Much Home Insurance Do I Need? Renters Insurance Best Renters Insurance Cheap Renters Insurance How Much Is Renters Insurance? Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Pet Insurance Quotes: Compare and Save Is Pet Insurance Worth It In 2023? Cheap Pet Insurance How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? Pet Insurance Pre-Existing Conditions Health Insurance Best Health Insurance Companies Short-Term Health Insurance Best Disability Insurance Health Insurance for Small Business Best Dental Insurance Companies Best Vision Insurance Companies Business Insurance Best Small Business Insurance Commercial Auto Insurance General Liability Insurance Cyber Liability Insurance Business Interruption Insurance Banking Banking Banking Best Banks Best Banks Best Online Banks Best Credit Unions Best Budget Apps Bank Promotions & Bonuses Best Bank Bonuses & Promotions Capital One Promotions Chase Promotions Wells Fargo Checking Account Bonus Bank Of America Promotions US Bank Promotions CDs Best CD Rates CD Rates Today CD Interest Rates Forecast 3 Month CD Rates 6 Month CD Rates 1 Year CD Rates 3 Year CD Rates 5 Year CD Rates 10 Year CD Rates No Penalty CD Rates Jumbo CD Rates Savings Best Savings Accounts Best High Yield Savings Accounts Best Savings Accounts For Kids Best Business Savings Accounts Best Money Market Accounts Checking Best Checking Accounts Best High Yield Checking Accounts Best Teen Checking Accounts Best Student Checking Accounts Best No Fee Checking Accounts Best Business Checking Accounts Taxes Best Tax Software Best Tax Apps Tax Relief Services Tax Brackets 2023 Income Tax Calculator Paycheck Calculator Money Transfer International Money Transfer Currency Calculator Investing Investing Investing Investing Basics Best Online Brokers Best Online Brokers For Day Trading Best Investment Apps Best Investment Management Apps Best Robo Advisors Gold Price Today Best Gold IRA Companies Wealth Financial Advisors Wealth Advisors Wealth Management Financial Planner Small Business Small Business Small Business Forming A Business Best LLC Services Best Registered Agent Services How to Start an LLC Cost to Form an LLC HR & Payroll Best Payroll Services Best HR Software Best PEO Services Best Recruiting Software Web Design & Hosting Best Website Builder Best Web Hosting Services Best Blogging Platforms Best Web Hosting Services VoIP & Communication Best VoIP Services Best Cheap VoIP Services Best Business Cell Phone Plans How to Get a Free Business Phone Number Project Management Best Project Management Software Best Free Project Management Software Best Gantt Chart Software Privacy & Security Best VPNs Best Cheap VPN Best Antivirus Software Best Password Managers Legal Legal Legal Find A Lawyer Best Personal Injury Lawyers Best Car Accident Lawyers Best Truck Accident Lawyers Best Motorcycle Accident Lawyers Legal Services Best Online Divorce Services Best Trademark Registration Services Best Name Change Services Best Prepaid Legal Services USA UK DE IN AU IT CA USA | Change Region Back to Forbes.com USA UK DE IN AU IT CA USA | Change Region You might be using an unsupported or outdated browser. To get the best possible experience please use the latest version of Chrome, Firefox, Safari, or Microsoft Edge to view this website. advisor Pet Insurance Advertiser Disclosure 20 Most Popular Dog Breeds (2023) Aaliyah PasolsContributorAaliyah Pasols is an award-winning journalist and editor who primarily covers lifestyle, culture, and entertainment. Originally from South Florida, she studied at Florida International University, where she completed a B.S. in Communications-Journalism and a minor in Sociology. She currently resides in New York City.Aaliyah Pasols Aaliyah PasolsContributorAaliyah Pasols is an award-winning journalist and editor who primarily covers lifestyle, culture, and entertainment. Originally from South Florida, she studied at Florida International University, where she completed a B.S. in Communications-Journalism and a minor in Sociology. She currently resides in New York City.Contributor Kelly Anne SmitheditorI'm a senior consumer finance reporter for Forbes Advisor. I cover what's going on in the news and how it affects your bottom line. When I'm not writing articles, I author the Forbes Advisor Weekly Newsletter. My work has been included in a variety of publications including Reader's Digest, NASDAQ, Bankrate and more. I've been featured as a personal finance expert in outlets like CNBC, Yahoo! Finance and CBS News Radio. I have a master's degree in international communication studies and I'm currently based in Paris, France. Follow me on Twitter at @keywordkelly.Fact CheckedKelly Anne SmithKelly Anne SmitheditorI'm a senior consumer finance reporter for Forbes Advisor. I cover what's going on in the news and how it affects your bottom line. When I'm not writing articles, I author the Forbes Advisor Weekly Newsletter. My work has been included in a variety of publications including Reader's Digest, NASDAQ, Bankrate and more. I've been featured as a personal finance expert in outlets like CNBC, Yahoo! Finance and CBS News Radio. I have a master's degree in international communication studies and I'm currently based in Paris, France. Follow me on Twitter at @keywordkelly.editorFact CheckedPublished: Sep 25, 2023, 1:02pm Editorial Note: We earn a commission from partner links on Forbes Advisor. Commissions do not affect our editors' opinions or evaluations. Getty Creative It’s no secret that dogs are beloved in the United States—an estimated 65 million households own at least one, according to the American Pet Products Association. But with an estimated 360 dog breeds out there, you may be wondering which ones make the top of the list. The American Kennel Club recounts the most popular dog breeds in the U.S. every year—and some breeds, like golden retrievers, may not surprise you, but there are others that are unexpectedly popular. While all of these dogs are widely adored, some of them come with distinct health issues. After selecting the right dog for you, the most important step you can take for your new pup’s health is getting the best pet insurance. Rank Dog breed 1 French bulldog 2 Labrador retriever 3 Golden retriever 4 German shepherd 5 Poodle 6 Bulldog 7 Rottweiler 8 Beagle 9 Daschund 10 German shorthaired pointer 11 Pembroke Welsh corgi 12 Australian shepherd 13 Yorkshire terrier 14 Cavalier King Charles spaniel 15 Doberman pinscher 16 Boxers 17 Miniature schnauzer 18 Cane corso 19 Great Dane 20 Shih Tzu * Source: The American Kennel Club Is Your Dog Covered? Get Peace of Mind With the Best Pet Insurance of 2023 Learn More Top 20 Most Popular Dog Breeds 1. French Bulldog Getty Creative French bulldogs or Frenchies as they’re affectionately called, have skyrocketed in popularity over the past few years, coming in at the top of the AKC’s most popular dog breeds list. “[Frenchies] are good for family atmospheres. They’re loving, playful and make cute noises,” says Dr. Antonio DeMarco, D.V.M., chief medical and mentorship officer of GoodVets, a network of in-person nationwide animal hospitals. Frenchies only need up to one hour of exercise per day, according to The Kennel Club. Since Frenchies are a brachycephalic breed, meaning their face is flat, they can easily have trouble breathing. You’ll have to pay special attention when exercising your Frenchie to ensure they’re not overheating during exercise, and avoid over-exerting them in hot or humid weather. Frenchies shed moderately but are typically considered low-shedders. They also aren’t a very vocal breed and won’t bark much. 2. Labrador Retriever Getty Creative The Labrador retriever has long been synonymous with the perfect family dog. As playful, energetic and loyal dogs, they’re ideal for almost any living situation. They’re also easy to train since they’re eager to please their owners. An intelligent dog with boundless energy, the Labrador retriever will need a good amount of space and time to exercise. More than two hours of exercise per day is recommended for this breed, according to The Kennel Club. They also need mental stimulation—think puzzle feeders or toys, training and sports. Labs have a thick double coat so they are prone to shedding, but you can reduce this by brushing them at least once per week. During high-shedding seasons like spring and fall, you may need to brush them daily. Labradors also have certain health issues to look out for. “Larger breed dogs are more prone to ACL tears…hip dysplasia and knee injuries,” says DeMarco. 3. Golden Retriever Getty Creative Golden retrievers, similar to their labrador counterparts, are also wonderful family companions. Gentle and friendly, these dogs are known for their affectionate and loving demeanor. When it comes to exercise, goldens need more than two hours a day, per The Kennel Club. These smart and active dogs love playing fetch and swimming. They also require mental stimulation and do well with training. Goldens have a longer and thicker coat than labradors, making them high shedders. It’s recommended to brush them daily or at least twice per week. These canines have similar health concerns to labradors, as they’re also prone to hip dysplasia, ACL tears and joint issues. Research also suggests that goldens unfortunately have a higher risk of cancer than most dogs. 4. German Shepherd Getty Creative German shepherds don’t just make great police and search and rescue dogs—they also make for loving house pets. German shepherds are “high-energy and have more of a protective side,” according to DeMarco. He also adds that they’re highly intelligent and require lots of mental stimulation. “With smart breed dogs, they tend to be more mischievous because they get bored easier,” DeMarco says. To prevent this, you can stimulate your dog through training, sports, chew toys or nose work games. German shepherds also respond well to commands, and are keen on having various “jobs.” The American Kennel Club describes them as “dogkind’s finest all-purpose worker.” Health issues for this breed include hip and elbow dysplasia, degenerative myelopathy (a neurological disorder), Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV) and others. 5. Poodle Getty Creative Poodles are known for being smart and social—and for their beautiful, high-maintenance coat. As one of the most intelligent dog breeds around, Poodles also need lots of exercise and brain games to be content. Poodles come in a standard size, miniature size and toy size. Generally, poodles tend to be proud, playful, friendly and bright. They’re good with other pets, strangers and children, making them quite versatile. When it comes to their coat, poodles need a lot of care. Rather than poodles being big shedders, their hair tends to get matted. To prevent this, you’ll need to brush them every other day. They will also need to be professionally clipped and groomed about every six weeks. As far as health issues go, poodles are prone to gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV), Cushing’s disease, eye issues like progressive retinal atrophy and more. 6. Bulldog Getty Creative Bulldogs are low-energy, and often referred to as lazy, says DeMarco. Bulldogs are more likely to join you on the couch to watch your favorite movie than to accompany you on a long run. Bulldogs need up to one hour per day of exercise, according to The Kennel Club. Daily walks and some games around the house should be sufficient. Similar to their Frenchie counterparts, bulldogs are a flat-faced breed, which places them at high risk of heat stroke. Also, bulldogs are not good swimmers, so be sure to keep an extra eye on them around a pool or lake. Bulldogs are also prone to skin fold dermatitis, cherry eye, dry eye, entropion and mange. Bulldogs don’t shed a ton as they have a short coat. 7. Rottweiler Getty Creative Rottweilers are in the working group of dog breeds, meaning that they thrive when they have an activity or “job.” Combined with their protective and alert nature, they make excellent watch or guard dogs. Despite this, they’re also a loving and loyal breed—with proper training and socialization, a rottie’s territorial instincts can be controlled. A rottweiler is a big dog, typically standing between 22 to 27 inches and weighing between 80 to 135 pounds. They’re an active breed and are great for accompanying you on a jog or long walks, and they also enjoy games and sports. Despite their protective nature, rottweilers aren’t known for being a very vocal breed. You won’t hear them bark much outside of protecting their territory and loved ones. When it comes to health concerns, rottweilers tend to have higher cases of hip dysplasia, eye issues such as progressive retinal atrophy and cataracts, as well as heart issues. 8. Beagle Getty Creative Beagles are known for their floppy ears and colorful coats. Their personalities tend to be described as loveable, happy and curious. They’re part of the hound group and are often used as scent-detection dogs at airports. Beagles are also an energetic breed and will need plenty of stimulation to thrive. Due to their keen nose, they may enjoy mental challenges with snuffle mats (a mat that can hide treats). Their preferred exercise is long walks with plenty of opportunities to sniff and explore. Just be sure to keep your dog’s leash short, as a beagle’s curiosity is known to make it wander. Beagles have a low-maintenance coat with an average amount of shedding and require brushing just once a week. Common health issues for beagles include intervertebral disc disease (IVDD), hip dysplasia, luxating patella and hypothyroidism. DeMarco adds that ear infections are also a top issue in beagles due to their “big, floppy ears.” 9. Daschund Getty Creative Often called “weiner dogs,” dachshunds are known for their long bodies and short legs. They’re funny, curious and have endless energy. But as with many small dogs, “they can be feisty,” DeMarco says. “When you come into their house, they let you know that it’s their house,” DeMarco adds. This also means that they tend to be a vocal breed. Dachshunds have a loud bark and will use it along with their bold personalities to express themselves. A dachshund’s grooming needs depend on the type you have. Dachshunds have three different types of coats: short-haired, long-haired and wire-haired. Short-haired dachshunds don’t require much brushing but long-haired dachshunds have hair that can get matted if not brushed daily. Wire-haired dachshunds look like miniature schnauzers (another dog on this list)—and have a beard that needs to be cared for. Health problems for dachshunds are mostly back problems due to their anatomy. IVDD is very prevalent in dachshunds. To prevent this, try to limit your dog from jumping off the sofa or any other strenuous exercise that can place stress on its back. 10. German Shorthaired Pointer Getty Creative German shorthaired pointers are another breed that does well with a job, training and vigorous exercise. This is because they are highly intelligent and active dogs—historically, they’ve been used as efficient hunting dogs. One interesting fact about this breed is that they’re known for pointing. A leftover instinct from their hunting nature, German shorthaired pointers will often stop and go into a “pointing” stance to show you something interesting. They’ve even been known to point while dreaming. Due to their high-maintenance exercise and mental stimulation needs, German shorthaired pointers are not for relaxed, inactive owners. German shorthaired pointers tend to be a vocal breed and will often bark and whine to get attention. Skin and ear infections, as well as eye diseases have also been noted as troublesome issues for the breed. 11. Pembroke Welsh Corgi Getty Creative Pembroke Welsh corgis are beloved for their short legs and lively, comedic personalities. These little guys have a lot of energy in a small package and will need up to one hour of exercise per day, according to The Kennel Club. Corgis are part of the herding group and have historically been used to guard farms, herd sheep and gather flocks of chickens. To please their herding instincts, you can get them involved in treibball. This dog sport is popular with herding breeds because they can “herd” big exercise balls. Health issues for corgis include degenerative myelopathy (neurological disorder), hip dysplasia and progressive retinal atrophy. 12. Australian Shepherd Getty Creative Another herding dog on this list, Australian shepherds are known for their boundless energy and gorgeous coat. They’re loyal, tough and brainy, but the main characteristic of this breed is that they need a job and training to be happy. Aussies are not for sedentary owners. Many owners tend to have Aussies help out on a farm or ranch, or they get them heavily involved in dog sports such as agility, treibball and flyball. “Brain games are also super important for them,” says Dr. Liz Stelow, D.V.M., D.A.C.V.B., veterinary behaviorist and service chief at the University of California-Davis School of Veterinary Medicine. “So, [things like] food toys, hide and seek around the house, flirt pole toys and dog sports.” An Aussie’s coat is of medium length and has average shedding. They will need to be brushed once or twice a week. Aussies are a hearty breed but some health issues include hip and elbow dysplasia, eye problems and epilepsy. 13. Yorkshire Terrier Getty Creative Yorkshire terriers, also referred to as “Yorkies,” are small dogs with big personalities. Despite their size, Yorkies are still terriers, which are known for their feisty attitude and alert nature. Due to this, they may bark a lot. “When I see Yorkies for behavior problems, it’s most often excessive barking,” Stelow says. Yorkies are a favorite of owners living in apartments, as they don’t require much exercise. They will be content with daily walks and some games around the house. A Yorkie’s gray and tan coat is often touted as being “hypoallergenic,” meaning it’s less likely to cause allergies and doesn’t shed much. However, daily brushing is required as their long hair can become matted. This breed should be professionally groomed every four to six weeks. Common health problems among Yorkies are collapsing trachea, luxating patellas and canine pancreatitis, among others. 14. Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Getty Creative Cavalier King Charles spaniels are not as regal and standoffish as their name may suggest. Stelow describes them as “super sweet, gentle, happy, fun-loving and funny.” They’re great family dogs that get along exceptionally well with children, other pets and even strangers. Cavalier King Charles spaniels’ exercise needs are adaptable. They can be both active dogs or lap dogs who cuddle up on the couch. This breed is typically calm and quiet, so you won’t have to worry much about barking and aggressive behavior, either. Unfortunately, Cavaliers do come with advanced health risks. The main concern is mitral valve disease, which is a heart condition.One study suggests that as many as 90% of Cavaliers will develop mitral valve disease, a heart condition, by the age of 10. Other issues are syringomyelia (fluid-filled areas around the spinal cord that cause pain), dry eye and ear disorders. 15. Doberman Pinscher Getty Creative Doberman pinschers are one of the bigger dogs on this list with a misunderstood reputation of being aggressive. But “for the most part, their native personality is not aggressive,” Stelow says. “Dobermans are lovely dogs. People who expect and train them to be guard dogs, [that’s when] they can become aggressive.” Dobermans otherwise can make great family pets. Training and socialization are essential with big-breed dogs so they can behave properly and you can have more control over them in social settings such as dog parks. Besides training, Dobermans also require lots of outdoor time. They love agility games and enjoy vast areas where they can run to burn energy. Dobermans have a short coat with average shedding, so they won’t need much upkeep besides weekly brushing. Health problems for this breed involve hip dysplasia, hypothyroidism, bloat and Wobbler syndrome (spinal disease). 16. Boxer Getty Creative Boxers are another breed that’s known for being protective of their owners. They’re a muscular dog that requires training and plenty of opportunities to exercise. Also due to their protective nature, socialization is important to limit a guarded attitude and any excessive territorial barking. Boxers are also known for being comical, energetic and loyal. They’re playful with children and generally get along well with other pets. “They’re fine family dogs but children should be watched more carefully around them just because boxers move quickly—one of the risks is a boxer knocking down children [accidentally] because they’re on the move so much,” Stelow says. Boxers are another flat-faced breed, making them also prone to heat stroke. Their time in hot or humid weather should be limited. Other health issues are different types of cancer (brain tumors, mast cell tumors, etc.), irregular heart rhythm (called ARVC or “boxer arrhythmia”) and GDV. 17. Miniature Schnauzer Getty Creative Miniature schnauzers are another terrier on this list, and are a high-energy, obedient and outgoing companion. As with most terriers, they do tend to bark a lot, so this behavior should be discouraged from an early age. Miniature schnauzers don’t need much exercise and will be satisfied with a couple of daily walks, brain games and indoor play. They are quick learners and do well with training but may get bored easily, making constant mental stimulation essential for this breed. A miniature schnauzer’s coat comes in three colors: salt and pepper, black and silver and solid black. Their hair is hard and wiry and will need combing once or twice a week. They can be taken to get professionally groomed every five to eight weeks. Health concerns for this breed include cataracts, pancreatitis, high cholesterol and kidney and bladder stones. 18. Cane Corso Getty Creative Cane corsos are one of the top 20 largest dog breeds, weighing up to as much as 110 pounds. But despite their athletic and hefty build “they can be gentle and sweet,” Stelow says. They’re mainly known for their confidence and assertiveness, which have long made them excellent guard dogs. A cane corso’s massive size comes with demanding exercise needs, too. They do well with long runs and challenging dog sports. As with most breeds on this list, mental stimulation is key. Be sure to keep your cane corso busy with puzzle feeders, snuff mats and games of hide and seek. Socialization and training are necessary for cane corsos due to their protective nature and large stature. Cane corsos are susceptible to hip dysplasia, bloat, epilepsy and mange. 19. Great Dane Getty Creative Great Danes are the gentle giants of the dog world. “They [often] don’t know how big they are, so they will knock stuff over without even realizing,” Stelow says. Still, though, Great Danes are friendly and aware enough that they make superb family pets. Known for being kind to children, this breed is sweet and eager to please. Due to their giant stature, Great Danes require a lot of maintenance. Not only will they require a lot of food, but also lots of exercise, training and socialization. They will also need a decent amount of living space to feel comfortable. One of the most prominent health issues for the breed is GDV. Other health issues include Wobbler syndrome (spinal disease) and hip dysplasia. 20. Shih Tzu Getty Creative Shih Tzus are part of the toy group and are adored for their short stature, playful personalities and cute hairstyles. They don’t require much activity and are content with a few walks a day. They make lovely lapdogs and are known for being affectionate. As with many small dogs, shih tzus tend to be vocal; early disapproval of barking is needed to curb this behavior. A shih tzu doesn’t shed much, but will need to be professionally groomed every four to six weeks. They should also be brushed daily. Shih Tzus have some distinct health concerns: ear infections, urinary tract infections, gastritis, skin infections and periodontal disease. They are also prone to eye issues. “In [flat-faced breeds], they don’t have the long snout to protect their eyeballs. So they’re prone to dry eye and runny eye,” says Stelow. Featured Partner Offers1Paw ProtectMaximum annual coverage $5,000, $10,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $5001Paw ProtectCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website2EmbraceMaximum annual coverage $5,000, $10,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $5002EmbraceCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website3SpotMaximum annual coverage $2,500, $3,000, $4,000, $5,000, $7,000, $10,000, $15,000, $20,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $500, $750, $1,0003SpotCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website Was this article helpful? Share your feedback Send feedback to the editorial team Rate this Article ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ Please rate the article Email Please enter valid email address Comments We'd love to hear from you, please enter your comments. Invalid email address Submit Thank You for your feedback! Something went wrong. Please try again later. Recommended Reading Best Pet Insurance Best Cheap Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Wellness Plans For Routine Care Best Pet Insurance For Older Dogs Best Pet Insurance For French Bulldogs Compare Pet Insurance Quotes Best Pet Insurance In Your State Pet Insurance Arizona (AZ) Pet Insurance California (CA) Pet Insurance Florida (FL) Pet Insurance Indiana (IN) Pet Insurance Massachusetts (MA) Pet Insurance New Jersey (NJ) Pet Insurance New York (NY) Pet Insurance Texas (TX) Pet Insurance Utah (UT) Pet Insurance Wisconsin (WI) Our Guides What Does Pet Insurance Cover? How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? How Does Pet Insurance Work? Pet Dental Insurance Explained How To Make A Pet Insurance Claim What Is a Pet Insurance Deductible? What is Pet Insurance Waiting Periods? Does Pet Insurance Cover Spaying and Neutering? What Pet Insurance Covers Cancer Treatment? Pet Insurance That Pays The Vet Directly Exotic Pet Insurance Life Insurance For Pets More In Pet Insurance Read This Next Most Expensive Dog Breeds For Pet Insurance Pet Insurance For Pre-Existing Conditions Pet Insurance for Multi Pets Dog Breed Quiz: What Dog Should I Get? Next Up In Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Best Cheap Pet Insurance How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? What Does Pet Insurance Cover? Is Pet Insurance Worth It? Compare Pet Insurance Quotes More from Tramadol For Dogs: Safe Dosages And Uses By Meera Pal Contributor How Long Are Cats Pregnant? By Patricia Louis Editor Bordetella Vaccine For Kennel Cough In Dogs By Patricia Louis Editor Parvo In Dogs: Symptoms And Treatments By Jean Marie Bauhaus Contributor Human Years To Dog Years Calculator By Meera Pal Contributor Human Years To Cat Years Calculator By Meera Pal Contributor Information provided on Forbes Advisor is for educational purposes only. Your financial situation is unique and the products and services we review may not be right for your circumstances. We do not offer financial advice, advisory or brokerage services, nor do we recommend or advise individuals or to buy or sell particular stocks or securities. Performance information may have changed since the time of publication. Past performance is not indicative of future results. Forbes Advisor adheres to strict editorial integrity standards. To the best of our knowledge, all content is accurate as of the date posted, though offers contained herein may no longer be available. The opinions expressed are the author’s alone and have not been provided, approved, or otherwise endorsed by our partners. Aaliyah Pasols Contributor Aaliyah Pasols is an award-winning journalist and editor who primarily covers lifestyle, culture, and entertainment. Originally from South Florida, she studied at Florida International University, where she completed a B.S. in Communications-Journalism and a minor in Sociology. She currently resides in New York City. © 2023 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved. AdChoices AdChoices Privacy Statement Terms and Conditions About Us Contact Us Careers Coupons Newsroom Forbes Quote of the Day Advertise lorem Are you sure you want to rest your choices? cancel ok The Forbes Advisor editorial team is independent and objective. To help support our reporting work, and to continue our ability to provide this content for free to our readers, we receive compensation from the companies that advertise on the Forbes Advisor site. This compensation comes from two main sources. First, we provide paid placements to advertisers to present their offers. The compensation we receive for those placements affects how and where advertisers’ offers appear on the site. This site does not include all companies or products available within the market. Second, we also include links to advertisers’ offers in some of our articles; these “affiliate links” may generate income for our site when you click on them. The compensation we receive from advertisers does not influence the recommendations or advice our editorial team provides in our articles or otherwise impact any of the editorial content on Forbes Advisor. While we work hard to provide accurate and up to date information that we think you will find relevant, Forbes Advisor does not and cannot guarantee that any information provided is complete and makes no representations or warranties in connection thereto, nor to the accuracy or applicability thereof. Here is a list of our partners who offer products that we have affiliate links for. 

Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Sign In Breeds A-Z Expert Advice Products & Services Sports & Events Clubs & Delegates Breed Explorer View All Breeds Find By Breed Name Select A Breed Affenpinscher Afghan Hound Airedale Terrier Akita Alaskan Klee Kai Alaskan Malamute American Bulldog American English Coonhound American Eskimo Dog American Foxhound American Hairless Terrier American Leopard Hound American Staffordshire Terrier American Water Spaniel Anatolian Shepherd Dog Appenzeller Sennenhund Australian Cattle Dog Australian Kelpie Australian Shepherd Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog Australian Terrier Azawakh Barbado da Terceira Barbet Basenji Basset Fauve de Bretagne Basset Hound Bavarian Mountain Scent Hound Beagle Bearded Collie Beauceron Bedlington Terrier Belgian Laekenois Belgian Malinois Belgian Sheepdog Belgian Tervuren Bergamasco Sheepdog Berger Picard Bernese Mountain Dog Bichon Frise Biewer Terrier Black and Tan Coonhound Black Russian Terrier Bloodhound Bluetick Coonhound Boerboel Bohemian Shepherd Bolognese Border Collie Border Terrier Borzoi Boston Terrier Bouvier des Flandres Boxer Boykin Spaniel Bracco Italiano Braque du Bourbonnais Braque Francais Pyrenean Braque Saint-Germain Brazilian Terrier Briard Brittany Broholmer Brussels Griffon Bull Terrier Bulldog Bullmastiff Cairn Terrier Canaan Dog Cane Corso Cardigan Welsh Corgi Carolina Dog Catahoula Leopard Dog Caucasian Shepherd Dog Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Central Asian Shepherd Dog Cesky Terrier Chesapeake Bay Retriever Chihuahua Chinese Crested Chinese Shar-Pei Chinook Chow Chow Cirneco dell’Etna Clumber Spaniel Cocker Spaniel Collie Coton de Tulear Croatian Sheepdog Curly-Coated Retriever Czechoslovakian Vlcak Dachshund Dalmatian Dandie Dinmont Terrier Danish-Swedish Farmdog Deutscher Wachtelhund Doberman Pinscher Dogo Argentino Dogue de Bordeaux Drentsche Patrijshond Drever Dutch Shepherd English Cocker Spaniel English Foxhound English Setter English Springer Spaniel English Toy Spaniel Entlebucher Mountain Dog Estrela Mountain Dog Eurasier Field Spaniel Finnish Lapphund Finnish Spitz Flat-Coated Retriever French Bulldog French Spaniel German Longhaired Pointer German Pinscher German Shepherd Dog German Shorthaired Pointer German Spitz German Wirehaired Pointer Giant Schnauzer Glen of Imaal Terrier Golden Retriever Gordon Setter Grand Basset Griffon Vendéen Great Dane Great Pyrenees Greater Swiss Mountain Dog Greyhound Hamiltonstovare Hanoverian Scenthound Harrier Havanese Hokkaido Hovawart Ibizan Hound Icelandic Sheepdog Irish Red and White Setter Irish Setter Irish Terrier Irish Water Spaniel Irish Wolfhound Italian Greyhound Jagdterrier Japanese Akitainu Japanese Chin Japanese Spitz Japanese Terrier Jindo Kai Ken Karelian Bear Dog Keeshond Kerry Blue Terrier Kishu Ken Komondor Kromfohrlander Kuvasz Labrador Retriever Lagotto Romagnolo Lakeland Terrier Lancashire Heeler Lapponian Herder Large Munsterlander Leonberger Lhasa Apso Löwchen Maltese Manchester Terrier (Standard) Manchester Terrier (Toy) Mastiff Miniature American Shepherd Miniature Bull Terrier Miniature Pinscher Miniature Schnauzer Mountain Cur Mudi Neapolitan Mastiff Nederlandse Kooikerhondje Newfoundland Norfolk Terrier Norrbottenspets Norwegian Buhund Norwegian Elkhound Norwegian Lundehund Norwich Terrier Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever Old English Sheepdog Otterhound Papillon Parson Russell Terrier Pekingese Pembroke Welsh Corgi Perro de Presa Canario Peruvian Inca Orchid Petit Basset Griffon Vendéen Pharaoh Hound Plott Hound Pointer Polish Lowland Sheepdog Pomeranian Pont-Audemer Spaniel Poodle (Miniature) Poodle (Standard) Poodle (Toy) Porcelaine Portuguese Podengo Portuguese Podengo Pequeno Portuguese Pointer Portuguese Sheepdog Portuguese Water Dog Pudelpointer Pug Puli Pumi Pyrenean Mastiff Pyrenean Shepherd Rafeiro do Alentejo Rat Terrier Redbone Coonhound Rhodesian Ridgeback Romanian Carpathian Shepherd Romanian Mioritic Shepherd Dog Rottweiler Russell Terrier Russian Toy Russian Tsvetnaya Bolonka Saint Bernard Saluki Samoyed Schapendoes Schipperke Scottish Deerhound Scottish Terrier Sealyham Terrier Segugio Italiano Shetland Sheepdog Shiba Inu Shih Tzu Shikoku Siberian Husky Silky Terrier Skye Terrier Sloughi Slovakian Wirehaired Pointer Slovensky Cuvac Slovensky Kopov Small Munsterlander Smooth Fox Terrier Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier Spanish Mastiff Spanish Water Dog Spinone Italiano Stabyhoun Staffordshire Bull Terrier Standard Schnauzer Sussex Spaniel Swedish Lapphund Swedish Vallhund Taiwan Dog Teddy Roosevelt Terrier Thai Bangkaew Thai Ridgeback Tibetan Mastiff Tibetan Spaniel Tibetan Terrier Tornjak Tosa Toy Fox Terrier Transylvanian Hound Treeing Tennessee Brindle Treeing Walker Coonhound Vizsla Volpino Italiano Weimaraner Welsh Springer Spaniel Welsh Terrier West Highland White Terrier Wetterhoun Whippet Wire Fox Terrier Wirehaired Pointing Griffon Wirehaired Vizsla Working Kelpie Xoloitzcuintli Yakutian Laika Yorkshire Terrier Explore by characteristic or group Select Characteristic or Group Smallest Dog Breeds Medium Dog Breeds Largest Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds of Dogs Hypoallergenic Dogs Best Family Dogs Best Guard Dogs Best Dog Breeds for Kids Best Dogs for Apartments Hairless Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds Of Dog Apartment Dogs Best Dogs For Apartment Dwellers Large Dog Breeds Sporting Group Hound Group Working Group Terrier Group Toy Group Non-Sporting Group Herding Group Miscellaneous Class Foundation Stock Service Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Compare Breeds Compare up to 5 different breeds side by side Find a Puppy Browse the AKC Marketplace to find the right puppy for you Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Featured Names The Most Popular Dog Names of 2022 Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Dog Name Finder Browse our extensive library of dog names for inspiration Can My Dog Eat____? Find out the best and worst foods for your dog and which to avoid Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products Shop Dog Products Breed-Specific Products Dog Toys & Treats Training Products Dog Gift Packs DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog Register a Purebred Dog Register a Litter Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Registration Downloadable Forms AKC Marketplace Find a Puppy AKC Rescue Network PuppyVisor Search Counselor Breeder Referral Contacts Dog Training Services Canine Good Citizen (CGC) GoodDog Helpline Find a Training Club Health & Dog Care Find a Dog Groomer AKC Pet Insurance AKC Reunite Microchips AKC Veterinary Network AKC S.A.F.E. Grooming Program Breeder Programs & Services Breeder Toolkit Breeder E-Z Reg Breeder Of Merit Program Bred With H.E.A.R.T Program Breeder Education AKC Canine College Browse All Services Featured Products Video Training Consultations PURCHASE NOW GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Match Shows 4-6 Month Beginner Puppy Puppy of Achievement National Owner Handled Series FSS Open Show Companion Sports Agility Obedience Rally Tracking Title Recognition Program Public Service Dog Barn Hunt Disc Dog Diving Dogs Flyball Search & Rescue Parent Club Title Recognition Performance Sports Field Events for Hounds Coursing, CAT & FAST CAT Earthdog Herding & Farm Dog Pointing Breeds Retrievers Scent Work Spaniels & Flushing Breeds Sports for Juniors Junior Showmanship Juniors in Companion Events Juniors in Performance Events PeeWee Special Attractions AKC Family Dog Program CGC & AKC S.T.A.R. Puppy AKC Trick Dog AKC Therapy Dog AKC Fit Dog AKC Temperament Test RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Share: Search Sign In Menu Breeds A-Z View All Breeds Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Compare Breeds Find a Puppy Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Expert Advice Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Dog Name Finder Can My Dog Eat____? Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products & Services Products Shop Dog Products DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog AKC Marketplace Dog Training Services Health & Dog Care Breeder Programs & Services AKC Canine College Browse All Services Sports & Events GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Companion Sports Title Recognition Program Performance Sports Sports for Juniors AKC Family Dog Program RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Clubs & Delegates Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Home Expert Advice Dog Breeds The Most Popular Dog Breeds of 2022 Back To Dog Breeds The Most Popular Dog Breeds of 2022 By Melanie Haid Published: Mar 15, 2023 | 4 Minutes Updated: May 23, 2023 Published: Mar 15, 2023 | 4 Minutes Updated: May 23, 2023 labrador retriever french bulldog most popular breeds The numbers are in! Which breed will be named the American Kennel Club’s most popular dog breed of 2022? As the world’s largest registry of purebred dogs, the AKC uses our registration statistics to rank the most popular breeds of the past year. And for the first time in history, 2022 found the French Bulldog taking the No. 1 spot. This ends the Labrador Retriever’s 31-year reign as the most popular dog breed in America. The New Top Dog The French Bulldog has moved into the number one position after climbing the ranks in popularity over the last ten years. In 2012, the Frenchie was ranked at No. 14. Since then, registrations have increased by over 1,000%, bringing this playful breed to the top. French Bulldogs held the No. 2 spot in 2021. Breaking the Lab’s top-dog status of over three decades is no small feat. The Frenchie is a smart, compact breed, and they can fit into various different lifestyles, perfect for people all across the country. This petite dog was first recognized by the AKC in 1898; they are beloved by everyone from families to single owners for their charming and adaptable nature. They have surged in popularity in cities across the country since their small size and generally quiet demeanor make them good fits for apartments and smaller homes. ©Sporthorse Photography - stock.adobe.com The French Bulldog takes the number one spot after the Labrador Retriever’s 31-year run Top Five Dog Breeds of 2022 Aside from this massive move, the top five list looks a bit familiar. The Labrador Retriever, Golden Retriever, German Shepherd Dog, and Poodle take ranks two through five, respectively. Rottweilers moved from No. 8 to No. 7, while the Dachshund bumped the German Shorthaired Pointer from No. 9 in 2021 to No. 10 in 2022. Other breeds that made major jumps from 2021 to 2022 are the American Hairless Terrier, Gordon Setter, Italian Greyhound, and Anatolian Shepherd Dog. Over the last ten years, breeds like the Cane Corso, Belgian Malinois, Giant Schnauzer, and English Cocker Spaniel have been making their way up the rankings in popularity, as well. Newly recognized by the AKC in 2022, the Mudi and Russian Toy debuted at No. 150 and No. 144—not bad for their first year! The Bracco Italiano became the 200th breed fully recognized by the AKC in July of 2022; as a result, it will debut in the registration rankings for 2023. Least Popular Dog Breeds of 2022 At the bottom of the list (Nos. 197 through 199) are the Sloughi, Norwegian Lundehund, and English Foxhound. Last year, the Norwegian Lundehund was at the bottom, but they have surpassed English Foxhounds in registration over the past year. English Foxhounds, like their American Foxhound cousins, were bred as agile, scent-driven hunting dogs. The American Kennel Club, which was founded in 1884, recognizes 200 breeds, with additional breeds working their way toward recognition comprising the AKC Foundation Stock Service (FSS) and the Miscellaneous Class. If you’re looking for a puppy of your own, AKC Marketplace can connect you with a responsible breeder. Knowing your dog will be counted as part of the compilation of the annual breed popularity list is only a small benefit of dog registration; the AKC is the only purebred dog registry in the United States that maintains systematic inspections and investigations. The AKC conducts thousands of inspections each year to ensure compliance with standards that support the welfare, safety, and health of dogs across the nation. The AKC and its affiliates have also donated over $67 million to canine health research as of 2022, and donated its 100th AKC Pet Disaster Relief Trailer in November of 2022. Most Popular Dog Breeds of 2022 Full List Rank Breed 1 French Bulldogs 2 Labrador Retrievers 3 Golden Retrievers 4 German Shepherd Dogs 5 Poodles 6 Bulldogs 7 Rottweilers 8 Beagles 9 Dachshunds 10 German Shorthaired Pointers 11 Pembroke Welsh Corgis 12 Australian Shepherds 13 Yorkshire Terriers 14 Cavalier King Charles Spaniels 15 Doberman Pinschers 16 Boxers 17 Miniature Schnauzers 18 Cane Corso 19 Great Danes 20 Shih Tzu 21 Siberian Huskies 22 Bernese Mountain Dogs 23 Pomeranians 24 Boston Terriers 25 Havanese 26 English Springer Spaniels 27 Shetland Sheepdogs 28 Brittanys 29 Cocker Spaniels 30 Border Collies 31 Miniature American Shepherds 32 Belgian Malinois 33 Vizslas 34 Chihuahuas 35 Pugs 36 Basset Hounds 37 Mastiffs 38 Maltese 39 Collies 40 English Cocker Spaniels 41 Rhodesian Ridgebacks 42 Newfoundlands 43 Shiba Inu 44 Weimaraners 45 West Highland White Terriers 46 Portuguese Water Dogs 47 Bichons Frises 48 Australian Cattle Dogs 49 Dalmatians 50 Bloodhounds 51 Papillons 52 Chesapeake Bay Retrievers 53 Samoyeds 54 Whippets 55 Akitas 56 St. Bernards 57 Wirehaired Pointing Griffons 58 Giant Schnauzers 59 German Wirehaired Pointers 60 Scottish Terriers 61 Bullmastiffs 62 Cardigan Welsh Corgis 63 Italian Greyhounds 64 Bull Terriers 65 Airedale Terriers 66 Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers 67 Alaskan Malamutes 68 Chinese Shar-Pei 69 Great Pyrenees 70 Cairn Terriers 71 Irish Setters 72 Miniature Pinschers 73 Russell Terriers 74 Old English Sheepdogs 75 Staffordshire Bull Terriers 76 Lagotti Romagnoli 77 Biewer Terriers 78 Dogues de Bordeaux 79 Anatolian Shepherd Dogs 80 Chinese Cresteds 81 Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers 82 Boykin Spaniels 83 Greater Swiss Mountain Dogs 84 Cotons de Tulear 85 Rat Terriers 86 Lhasa Apsos 87 American Staffordshire Terriers 88 Dogo Argentinos 89 Irish Wolfhounds 90 Keeshonden 91 Basenjis 92 Chow Chows 93 English Setters 94 Standard Schnauzers 95 Border Terriers 96 Pekingese 97 Brussels Griffons 98 Bouviers des Flandres 99 Gordon Setters 100 Norwegian Elkhounds 101 Borzois 102 Wire Fox Terriers 103 Flat-Coated Retrievers 104 Belgian Tervuren 105 Japanese Chin 106 Tibetan Terriers 107 Pointers 108 Toy Fox Terriers 109 Norwich Terriers 110 Miniature Bull Terriers 111 Beaucerons 112 Spinoni Italiani 113 Welsh Terriers 114 Leonbergers 115 Schipperke 116 Xoloitzcuintlis 117 Afghan Hounds 118 Boerboels 119 Neapolitan Mastiffs 120 American Hairless Terriers 121 Parson Russell Terriers 122 Silky Terriers 123 American Eskimo Dogs 124 Bearded Collies 125 Belgian Sheepdogs 126 Welsh Springer Spaniels 127 Tibetan Spaniels 128 Black Russian Terriers 129 Greyhounds 130 Manchester Terriers 131 Irish Terriers 132 Icelandic Sheepdogs 133 Bluetick Coonhounds 134 English Toy Spaniels 135 Salukis 136 Australian Terriers 137 Tibetan Mastiffs 138 Norfolk Terriers 139 Clumber Spaniels 140 Pumik 141 Smooth Fox Terriers 142 Wirehaired Vizslas 143 Lakeland Terriers 144 Russian Toys 145 German Pinschers 146 Kerry Blue Terriers 147 Barbets 148 Affenpinschers 149 Black and Tan Coonhounds 150 Mudis 151 Briards 152 Bedlington Terriers 153 Berger Picards 154 Petits Bassets Griffons Vendéens 155 Scottish Deerhounds 156 Curly-Coated Retrievers 157 Field Spaniels 158 Redbone Coonhounds 159 Treeing Walker Coonhounds 160 Swedish Vallhunds 161 Pulik 162 Entlebucher Mountain Dogs 163 Spanish Water Dogs 164 Sealyham Terriers 165 Löwchen 166 American Water Spaniels 167 Finnish Lapphunds 168 Irish Red and White Setters 169 Glen of Imaal Terriers 170 Nederlandse Kooikerhondjes 171 Portuguese Podengo Pequenos 172 Ibizan Hounds 173 Plott Hounds 174 Pharaoh Hounds 175 Komondorok 176 Otterhounds 177 Kuvaszok 178 Norwegian Buhunds 179 Bergamasco Sheepdogs 180 Chinooks 181 Polish Lowland Sheepdogs 182 American English Coonhounds 183 Irish Water Spaniels 184 Cirnechi dell’Etna 185 Grand Basset Griffon Vendéens 186 Dandie Dinmont Terriers 187 Canaan Dogs 188 Finnish Spitz 189 Skye Terriers 190 Pyrenean Shepherds 191 Cesky Terriers 192 Sussex Spaniels 193 Harriers 194 Azawakhs 195 Belgian Laekenois 196 American Foxhounds 197 Sloughis 198 Norwegian Lundehunds 199 English Foxhounds At AKC Marketplace, we can help you find your dream dog. You can find AKC-registerable puppies from responsible, passionate breeders, and we provide the tools you need for every step of the process. Visit marketplace.akc.org to start connecting with dog breeders in your area! Related article: French Bulldog History: A Complicated Past From Brothels to Royals https://www.akc.org/wp-admin/admin-ajax.php Get Your Free AKC eBook Share a few contact details to get your FREE e-book What to do if your pet goes missing? If the unthinkable were to happen, are you prepared? Download this e-books to learn what steps to take if your dog goes missing. SUBMIT *Turn off pop-up blocker to download DOWNLOAD E-BOOK *Turn off pop-up blocker to download AKC Privacy Policy AKC is a participant in affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to akc.org. If you purchase a product through this article, we may receive a portion of the sale. TOP Founded in 1884, the not-for-profit AKC is the recognized and trusted expert in breed, health, and training information for all dogs. AKC actively advocates for responsible dog ownership and is dedicated to advancing dog sports. ABOUT US + About AKC Our Mission Our History Minutes & Reports AKC Library & Archives Awards & Honors Press Center Board of Directors & Executive Officers Careers Newsletter Subscriptions Contact Us Top Services + Find a Puppy Find a Dog Groomer Register Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Dog Training Help Shop AKC Store Top Resources + Delegates Portal Downloadable Forms Rules, Regulations & Policies Answer Center Judges' Directory Government Relations Inspections & Compliance Working It Out℠ Guide & FAQs Active Shooter & Mass Attack Safety Resources Get Involved + Attend a Dog Show Participate in an Event Donate to AKC Find a Dog Club AKC Humane Fund Favorite Things + Watch Dog Shows Top 100 Girl Dog Names Top 100 Boy Dog Names Most Popular Dog Breeds Hypoallergenic Dog Breeds Why Do Dogs Eat Poop? Why Is My Dog Limping? How to Remove a Tick How to Potty Train a Puppy CBD Oil for Dogs Best Dog Podcast Best Calming Treats for Dogs Advertise With AKC Terms of Use Privacy & Cookies CA Privacy Rights Website Info & FAQs Linking Policy Material Reproduction Policy © The American Kennel Club, Inc. 2022. All rights reserved. 

Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Sign In Breeds A-Z Expert Advice Products & Services Sports & Events Clubs & Delegates Breed Explorer View All Breeds Find By Breed Name Select A Breed Affenpinscher Afghan Hound Airedale Terrier Akita Alaskan Klee Kai Alaskan Malamute American Bulldog American English Coonhound American Eskimo Dog American Foxhound American Hairless Terrier American Leopard Hound American Staffordshire Terrier American Water Spaniel Anatolian Shepherd Dog Appenzeller Sennenhund Australian Cattle Dog Australian Kelpie Australian Shepherd Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog Australian Terrier Azawakh Barbado da Terceira Barbet Basenji Basset Fauve de Bretagne Basset Hound Bavarian Mountain Scent Hound Beagle Bearded Collie Beauceron Bedlington Terrier Belgian Laekenois Belgian Malinois Belgian Sheepdog Belgian Tervuren Bergamasco Sheepdog Berger Picard Bernese Mountain Dog Bichon Frise Biewer Terrier Black and Tan Coonhound Black Russian Terrier Bloodhound Bluetick Coonhound Boerboel Bohemian Shepherd Bolognese Border Collie Border Terrier Borzoi Boston Terrier Bouvier des Flandres Boxer Boykin Spaniel Bracco Italiano Braque du Bourbonnais Braque Francais Pyrenean Braque Saint-Germain Brazilian Terrier Briard Brittany Broholmer Brussels Griffon Bull Terrier Bulldog Bullmastiff Cairn Terrier Canaan Dog Cane Corso Cardigan Welsh Corgi Carolina Dog Catahoula Leopard Dog Caucasian Shepherd Dog Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Central Asian Shepherd Dog Cesky Terrier Chesapeake Bay Retriever Chihuahua Chinese Crested Chinese Shar-Pei Chinook Chow Chow Cirneco dell’Etna Clumber Spaniel Cocker Spaniel Collie Coton de Tulear Croatian Sheepdog Curly-Coated Retriever Czechoslovakian Vlcak Dachshund Dalmatian Dandie Dinmont Terrier Danish-Swedish Farmdog Deutscher Wachtelhund Doberman Pinscher Dogo Argentino Dogue de Bordeaux Drentsche Patrijshond Drever Dutch Shepherd English Cocker Spaniel English Foxhound English Setter English Springer Spaniel English Toy Spaniel Entlebucher Mountain Dog Estrela Mountain Dog Eurasier Field Spaniel Finnish Lapphund Finnish Spitz Flat-Coated Retriever French Bulldog French Spaniel German Longhaired Pointer German Pinscher German Shepherd Dog German Shorthaired Pointer German Spitz German Wirehaired Pointer Giant Schnauzer Glen of Imaal Terrier Golden Retriever Gordon Setter Grand Basset Griffon Vendéen Great Dane Great Pyrenees Greater Swiss Mountain Dog Greyhound Hamiltonstovare Hanoverian Scenthound Harrier Havanese Hokkaido Hovawart Ibizan Hound Icelandic Sheepdog Irish Red and White Setter Irish Setter Irish Terrier Irish Water Spaniel Irish Wolfhound Italian Greyhound Jagdterrier Japanese Akitainu Japanese Chin Japanese Spitz Japanese Terrier Jindo Kai Ken Karelian Bear Dog Keeshond Kerry Blue Terrier Kishu Ken Komondor Kromfohrlander Kuvasz Labrador Retriever Lagotto Romagnolo Lakeland Terrier Lancashire Heeler Lapponian Herder Large Munsterlander Leonberger Lhasa Apso Löwchen Maltese Manchester Terrier (Standard) Manchester Terrier (Toy) Mastiff Miniature American Shepherd Miniature Bull Terrier Miniature Pinscher Miniature Schnauzer Mountain Cur Mudi Neapolitan Mastiff Nederlandse Kooikerhondje Newfoundland Norfolk Terrier Norrbottenspets Norwegian Buhund Norwegian Elkhound Norwegian Lundehund Norwich Terrier Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever Old English Sheepdog Otterhound Papillon Parson Russell Terrier Pekingese Pembroke Welsh Corgi Perro de Presa Canario Peruvian Inca Orchid Petit Basset Griffon Vendéen Pharaoh Hound Plott Hound Pointer Polish Lowland Sheepdog Pomeranian Pont-Audemer Spaniel Poodle (Miniature) Poodle (Standard) Poodle (Toy) Porcelaine Portuguese Podengo Portuguese Podengo Pequeno Portuguese Pointer Portuguese Sheepdog Portuguese Water Dog Pudelpointer Pug Puli Pumi Pyrenean Mastiff Pyrenean Shepherd Rafeiro do Alentejo Rat Terrier Redbone Coonhound Rhodesian Ridgeback Romanian Carpathian Shepherd Romanian Mioritic Shepherd Dog Rottweiler Russell Terrier Russian Toy Russian Tsvetnaya Bolonka Saint Bernard Saluki Samoyed Schapendoes Schipperke Scottish Deerhound Scottish Terrier Sealyham Terrier Segugio Italiano Shetland Sheepdog Shiba Inu Shih Tzu Shikoku Siberian Husky Silky Terrier Skye Terrier Sloughi Slovakian Wirehaired Pointer Slovensky Cuvac Slovensky Kopov Small Munsterlander Smooth Fox Terrier Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier Spanish Mastiff Spanish Water Dog Spinone Italiano Stabyhoun Staffordshire Bull Terrier Standard Schnauzer Sussex Spaniel Swedish Lapphund Swedish Vallhund Taiwan Dog Teddy Roosevelt Terrier Thai Bangkaew Thai Ridgeback Tibetan Mastiff Tibetan Spaniel Tibetan Terrier Tornjak Tosa Toy Fox Terrier Transylvanian Hound Treeing Tennessee Brindle Treeing Walker Coonhound Vizsla Volpino Italiano Weimaraner Welsh Springer Spaniel Welsh Terrier West Highland White Terrier Wetterhoun Whippet Wire Fox Terrier Wirehaired Pointing Griffon Wirehaired Vizsla Working Kelpie Xoloitzcuintli Yakutian Laika Yorkshire Terrier Explore by characteristic or group Select Characteristic or Group Smallest Dog Breeds Medium Dog Breeds Largest Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds of Dogs Hypoallergenic Dogs Best Family Dogs Best Guard Dogs Best Dog Breeds for Kids Best Dogs for Apartments Hairless Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds Of Dog Apartment Dogs Best Dogs For Apartment Dwellers Large Dog Breeds Sporting Group Hound Group Working Group Terrier Group Toy Group Non-Sporting Group Herding Group Miscellaneous Class Foundation Stock Service Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Compare Breeds Compare up to 5 different breeds side by side Find a Puppy Browse the AKC Marketplace to find the right puppy for you Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Featured Names The Most Popular Dog Names of 2022 Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Dog Name Finder Browse our extensive library of dog names for inspiration Can My Dog Eat____? Find out the best and worst foods for your dog and which to avoid Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products Shop Dog Products Breed-Specific Products Dog Toys & Treats Training Products Dog Gift Packs DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog Register a Purebred Dog Register a Litter Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Registration Downloadable Forms AKC Marketplace Find a Puppy AKC Rescue Network PuppyVisor Search Counselor Breeder Referral Contacts Dog Training Services Canine Good Citizen (CGC) GoodDog Helpline Find a Training Club Health & Dog Care Find a Dog Groomer AKC Pet Insurance AKC Reunite Microchips AKC Veterinary Network AKC S.A.F.E. Grooming Program Breeder Programs & Services Breeder Toolkit Breeder E-Z Reg Breeder Of Merit Program Bred With H.E.A.R.T Program Breeder Education AKC Canine College Browse All Services Featured Products Video Training Consultations PURCHASE NOW GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Match Shows 4-6 Month Beginner Puppy Puppy of Achievement National Owner Handled Series FSS Open Show Companion Sports Agility Obedience Rally Tracking Title Recognition Program Public Service Dog Barn Hunt Disc Dog Diving Dogs Flyball Search & Rescue Parent Club Title Recognition Performance Sports Field Events for Hounds Coursing, CAT & FAST CAT Earthdog Herding & Farm Dog Pointing Breeds Retrievers Scent Work Spaniels & Flushing Breeds Sports for Juniors Junior Showmanship Juniors in Companion Events Juniors in Performance Events PeeWee Special Attractions AKC Family Dog Program CGC & AKC S.T.A.R. Puppy AKC Trick Dog AKC Therapy Dog AKC Fit Dog AKC Temperament Test RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Share: Search Sign In Menu Breeds A-Z View All Breeds Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Compare Breeds Find a Puppy Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Expert Advice Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Dog Name Finder Can My Dog Eat____? Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products & Services Products Shop Dog Products DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog AKC Marketplace Dog Training Services Health & Dog Care Breeder Programs & Services AKC Canine College Browse All Services Sports & Events GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Companion Sports Title Recognition Program Performance Sports Sports for Juniors AKC Family Dog Program RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Clubs & Delegates Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Home Most Popular Dog Breeds Back To Home Most Popular Dog Breeds Every year the American Kennel Club releases our ranking of the most popular dog breeds based on AKC registration statistics for the previous year. For the first time since 1991, the Labrador Retriever is not in the top spot, usurped by the French Bulldog, who was at the number two spot in 2021. Below, find ranked annual lists of AKC-recognized breeds. 2022 + French Bulldog Labrador Retriever Golden Retriever German Shepherd Dog Poodle Full 2022 most popular dog breed list 2021 + Labrador Retriever French Bulldog Golden Retriever German Shepherd Dog Poodle Full 2021 most popular dog breed list 2020 + Labrador Retriever French Bulldog German Shepherd Dog Golden Retriever Bulldog Full 2020 most popular dog breed list 2019 + Labrador Retriever German Shepherd Dog Golden Retriever French Bulldog Bulldog Full 2019 most popular dog breed list 2018 + Labrador Retriever German Shepherd Dog Golden Retriever French Bulldog Bulldog Full 2018 most popular dog breed list 2017 + Labrador Retriever German Shepherd Dog Golden Retriever French Bulldog Bulldog Full 2017 most popular dog breed list 2016 + Labrador Retriever German Shepherd Dog Golden Retriever Bulldog Beagle Full 2016 most popular dog breed list 2015 + Labrador Retriever German Shepherd Dog Golden Retriever Bulldog Beagle Full 2015 most popular dog breed list 2014 + Labrador Retriever German Shepherd Dog Golden Retriever Bulldog Beagle Full 2014 most popular dog breed list 2013 + Labrador Retriever German Shepherd Dog Golden Retriever Beagle Bulldog Full 2013 most popular dog breed list AKC is a participant in affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to akc.org. If you purchase a product through this article, we may receive a portion of the sale. TOP Founded in 1884, the not-for-profit AKC is the recognized and trusted expert in breed, health, and training information for all dogs. AKC actively advocates for responsible dog ownership and is dedicated to advancing dog sports. ABOUT US + About AKC Our Mission Our History Minutes & Reports AKC Library & Archives Awards & Honors Press Center Board of Directors & Executive Officers Careers Newsletter Subscriptions Contact Us Top Services + Find a Puppy Find a Dog Groomer Register Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Dog Training Help Shop AKC Store Top Resources + Delegates Portal Downloadable Forms Rules, Regulations & Policies Answer Center Judges' Directory Government Relations Inspections & Compliance Working It Out℠ Guide & FAQs Active Shooter & Mass Attack Safety Resources Get Involved + Attend a Dog Show Participate in an Event Donate to AKC Find a Dog Club AKC Humane Fund Favorite Things + Watch Dog Shows Top 100 Girl Dog Names Top 100 Boy Dog Names Most Popular Dog Breeds Hypoallergenic Dog Breeds Why Do Dogs Eat Poop? Why Is My Dog Limping? How to Remove a Tick How to Potty Train a Puppy CBD Oil for Dogs Best Dog Podcast Best Calming Treats for Dogs Advertise With AKC Terms of Use Privacy & Cookies CA Privacy Rights Website Info & FAQs Linking Policy Material Reproduction Policy © The American Kennel Club, Inc. 2022. All rights reserved. 

SearchSubscribeMy BookmarksMember ExclusivesCountry LifeHoliday & EntertainingFood & DrinksKids & PetsDesign IdeasReal EstateRemodeling & RenovationGardeningHome MaintenanceCrafts & DIY ProjectsCountry Living ShopShopping GuidesCountry Living FairNewsletterFollowPromotionsWinOther EditionsPrivacy NoticeTerms Of UseSkip to ContentFood & DrinksGardeningHomeShoppingLifeSubscribesign inCountry LifeKids & PetsThe 60 Most Popular Dog Breeds in the U.S.The 60 Most Popular Dog Breeds in the U.S.The Labrador retriever held the title for 31 years—but not anymore.By Karla Pope and Jennie HeldermanUpdated: Jun 23, 2023saved contained iconAn empty outlined icon indicating the option to save an itemSave ArticleA dog is a man's best friend, no matter the breed—but every year, the American Kennel Club (AKC) compiles a list of the most popular dog breeds in the country based on registration statistics. And after 31 years, the beloved Labrador retriever is no longer the most popular dog breed in the U.S. In a historic jump, the French bulldog (affectionately nicknamed "Frenchie") took the top spot in 2022, pushing the Labrador retriever to the second most-registered breed in the country. It's worth noting that just a decade ago, the French bulldog was no. 14 on the list. What a climb!While the Frenchie and Labrador retriever breeds are popular, they're not the only pups Americans clamor for. There are plenty of other popular dog breeds that pet owners welcome into their homes and eventually call family. From small breeds, like chihuahuas, to big ones, like Great Danes, this list includes the top 60 dog breeds in America, according to the AKC. While their sizes and temperaments may vary, one thing rings true for just about every pup on this list: unmatched loyalty.So whether you're looking to add a new pet to your family or just curious about the most popular pups in America, let this list be your handy guide. Oh, and if you're looking for names for one of these breeds, we've got you covered. Check out the best boy dog names and best girl dog names for terr-woofic inspiration. 1 French BulldogsMike Linnane / 500px//Getty ImagesIn 2012, Frenchies ranked at no. 14 on the list. After jumping to the no. 2 spot in 2021, the playful breed took the top spot in 2022. Congrats, pal!2 Labrador Retrieversgetty imagesHaving held the title of the most popular dog breed in the U.S. for more than three decades, these lively, all-American pups had the longest reign of any breed. Hey, no. 2 is nothing to sneeze at!3 Golden Retrieversgetty images A friendly, playful sporting dog, golden retrievers are eager, alert, self-confident, and very active and energetic, but they're no watchdogs. This breed is slow to mature, retaining puppy personality for three to four years, which humans may find either delightful or annoying.Advertisement - Continue Reading Below4 German Shepherdsgetty imagesHighly intelligent, seriously loyal, utterly devoted and known for dignity and stature, they can run at great speeds. Buy a heavy duty vacuum if you're bringing one home, as they're nicknamed "the German Shedder."5 Poodlesgetty imagesThe national dog of France was originally a hunting dog from Germany. They're good swimmers with waterproof coats, perfect for duck hunting. Their signature fancy haircut is actually a practical protection for joints and vital organs in cold water.6 Bulldogsgetty imagesCalm, courageous, friendly, affectionate and stubborn, this breed prefers watching TV to taking walks.Advertisement - Continue Reading Below7 Rottweilersgetty imagesThese canines are "protective, not vicious—they read your cues," says Katie Owens of Atlantahaus Rottweilers, breeders of German Rottweilers since 1979. Although robust and powerful, these pups think they're lap dogs.8 Beaglesgetty imagesA scent hound used primarily to hunt rabbits, beagles are friendly, companionable, and sturdy. They're always curious and tend to follow their noses, which can lead to trouble.9 Dachshundsgetty imagesPlayful, brave, and curious, wiener dogs like to dig holes in the yard and chase chipmunks. They're notoriously difficult to housebreak and prefer a covered potty yard for cold or wet weather. Advertisement - Continue Reading Below10 German Shorthaired Pointersgetty imagesA streamlined, yet powerful, hunting dog with webbed feet, this pooch is best at going after water fowl. GSPs are bold, eccentric, and tenacious, and they can perform all gun dog roles. However, their strong hunting instinct means they may not do so well around other small pets, such as cats or rabbits.11 Pembroke Welsh Corgisgetty imagesLegend says this breed sprang from lairs of fairies and elves. PWCs are the smallest herding dog; as such, they'll nip at the heels of kids to herd them and bark at everything.12 Australian ShepherdsNicolai Cebotari / 500px//Getty ImagesWhat's in a name? Well, this pooch has had many. Bob-Tails, Pastor Dogs, and Blue Heelers are just a few monikers this breed has been called. Known for their different-colored eyes and boundless energy, Aussies make great pets. If you're not a fan of shedding, you might want to rethink bringing one home. Advertisement - Continue Reading Below13 Yorkshire Terriersgetty imagesThese six-inch, seven-pound hunting dogs were bred to catch rats and mice that infested clothing mills and mine shafts in Yorkshire, England. With a demeanor that conveys an important air, they're fine companions for adults, but not a good fit for children.14 Cavalier King Charles Spanielsgetty imagesA sweet-tempered cuddle buddy with an independent streak, this shiny pooch loves to chase squirrels and butterflies. The breed requires lots of attention and isn't happy when left alone. 15 Doberman Pinschersgetty imagesVery keen and super energetic, with tremendous strength and stamina, Doberman Pinschers are nonetheless sensitive to cold, and thus, not outdoor dogs. The breed is the official dog of the U.S. Marine Corps in World War II; a Doberman named Cappy saved the lives of 250 Marines during the war and became the first K-9 casualty. He was the first dog buried in the National War Dog Cemetery at the Naval Base in Guam.Advertisement - Continue Reading Below16 Boxersgetty imagesLegend says this breed's name came about because they fight standing on hind legs like a boxer. True or not, they are descendants of an old Tibetan fighting dog and were pictured on 16th- and 17th-century Flemish tapestries of stag and boar hunts. 17 Miniature Schnauzersgetty imagesWeighing in at 10 to 15 pounds, this sturdy dog is affectionate, keen, and docile—but can think he knows more than you. They must be made to heel and follow owner through doors; they make for good watchdogs and vermin hunters.18 Cane CorsosViewStock//Getty ImagesAlso known as the Italian Mastiff, this well-muscled descendant of dogs used by the Romans in warfare weighs in at 100 pounds. Their large, imposing heads make them a favorite of night watchmen, though they're not recommended for first-time dog owners.Advertisement - Continue Reading Below19 Great Danesgetty imagesThe world's tallest dog is a gentle giant with a good disposition. These pups are playful, patient with children, loyal, and dependable, with a life expectancy of six to 10 years.20 Shih Tzus© copyright 2011 Sharleen Chao//Getty ImagesThe name means "Little Lion," but this breed is more lover than hunter. They're affectionate and happy, regal, and bred to be companions—great pets for children. As for drawbacks, they're difficult to housebreak and often wheeze and snore.Karla PopeKarla Pope is a longtime writer, editor and blogger with nearly two decades of editorial experience. She’s written for a variety of outlets including Good Housekeeping, Woman’s Day, People, Parade, BET.com. WebMD and more. Her coverage includes entertainment, beauty, lifestyle, parenting and fashion content. If she's not exploring New York City with her two young children, you can find her curled up on the couch watching a documentary and eating gummy bears. PetsWhy Do Dogs Dig and How Can You Stop Them?20 Best Dog Puzzles of 2023 to Shop NowWhat Is the Cutest Cat Name? 185 Top Contenders9 Best Slow Feeder Dog BowlsAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowIs It OK to Bathe a Cat?The Best Gifts for Cat LoversThe Most Popular Dog Breed for Your Zodiac SignCute Dog Instagram Captions for All Those PostsPresented by Eukanuba25 Best Tips for Camping with DogsThe Best Dog Collars of 2023Cat Quotes All True Cat Lovers Can Relate To70 Best Gifts for Dog Lovers and Their PupsAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowNewsletterAbout UsMedia KitPress RoomContact UsCommunity GuidelinesAdvertise OnlineCustomer ServiceSubscribeOther Hearst SubscriptionsGive a GiftEvents & PromotionsGiveawaysA Part of Hearst Digital MediaWe may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back.©2023 Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Privacy NoticeCA Notice at CollectionYour CA Privacy Rights/Shine the LightDAA Industry Opt OutTerms of UseSite MapCookies Choices 

Skip NavigationSuccessStartupsSide HustlesPower PlayersYoung SuccessMoneyEarnSpendSave and InvestBecome Debt-FreeWorkLand the JobGet AheadClosing the GapScience of SuccessLifePop Culture and MediaPsychology and RelationshipsHealth and WellnessReal EstateVideoMost PopularCNBC TVMenuSEARCHCNBC.COMRelated StoriesMad MoneyUse volatility created by Fed meetings to buy, says Jim CramerFA 10044. NorthStar Asset ManagementSportsHP joins United Airlines in sponsoring the Welsh soccer club WrexhamLife ChangesKPMG offers high schoolers paid internships to boost interest in accountingFA 10098. Richard C. Young & Co.LifeThe French Bulldog is the No. 1 most popular dog breed in the U.S.Published Sun, Mar 19 202310:00 AM EDTCelia Fernandez@cfernan6ShareShare Article via FacebookShare Article via TwitterShare Article via LinkedInShare Article via EmailThe French Bulldog topped the most popular dogs of the U.S. for the first time.Mykola Romanovskyy | Moment | Getty ImagesFor the first time in 31 years, the United States has a new favorite dog breed.The American Kennel Club released its 2022 registration statistics and found that after being the most popular dog breed for three decades, the Labrador Retriever was outranked by the French Bulldog.According to a press release, the French Bulldog has spiked in popularity over the last 10 years. In 2012, the breed was the 14th most popular and jumped to no. 2 in the 2021 rankings. Registrations have also increased by over 1,000% from 2012 to 2022.According to the American Kennel Club, French Bulldog registrations increased by over 1,000% from 2012 to 2022.Meaghanbrowning | Room | Getty ImagesTo rank the most popular dog breeds, the American Kennel Club used statistics based on about 716,500 voluntary registrations from dog owners.The rankings do not include mixed breeds or popular "designer" hybrids, such as Labradoodles, since the American Kennel Club recognizes just 200 dog breeds.Top 10 most popular dog breeds in the U.S.French BulldogsLabrador RetrieversGolden RetrieversGerman Shepherd DogsPoodlesBulldogsRottweilersBeaglesDachshundsGerman Shorthaired PointersFrench Bulldogs are a favorite among celebrities, including Reese Witherspoon and Megan Thee Stallion.And while the breed continues to grow in popularity, the American Kennel Club says it's essential to do your research before committing to it.According to a 2021 study published in Canine Medicine and Genetics, French Bulldogs have a higher chance of being diagnosed with 20 common disorders compared to other breeds, like heatstroke and respiratory issues, due to their flat faces.The Labrador Retriever ranked second on the list. The longtime U.S. favorite is widely known as a companion dog and can be trained as a guide or assistance dog.The dog breed that rounded out the top three was Golden Retrievers. According to the American Kennel Club, it is a great breed to serve as a guide for the blind and enjoys obedience and other competitive events.DON'T MISS: Want to be smarter and more successful with your money, work & life? Sign up for our new newsletter!Get CNBC's free Warren Buffett Guide to Investing, which distills the billionaire's No. 1 best piece of advice for regular investors, do's and don'ts, and three key investing principles into a clear and simple guidebook.Related VideoVIDEO0:5600:56Manny the Frenchie has nearly 3 million followers on social media—here's how he deals with the fameMake ItStay in the loopGet Make It newsletters delivered to your inboxSign UpAbout UsLearn more about the world of CNBC Make ItLearn MoreFollow UsCNBC.COMJoin the CNBC Panel© 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBC UniversalPrivacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationCA NoticeTerms of ServiceContact 

A-Z Animals Invertebrates Mammals Reptiles Birds Fish Dogs Dog Collars Best Dog Collar Best Smart Dog Collar Halo Dog Collar Spoton vs Halo Collar Fi Collar Wagz Freedom Dog Collar SpotOn Dog Collar Dog Fence Best Dog Fence Best Wireless Dog Fence Best Invisible Dog Fence Dog Accessories Dog Training Dog Harness Dog Leashes Dog Food Dog Grooming Dog Breeds Hmong Docked Tail Dog The American Bully White German Shepherd Mini Goldendoodle Blue Nose Pitbull Cavapoo Toy Poodle Neapolitan Mastiff Xoloitzcuintli Chiweenie Australian Shepherd White German Shepherd English Cocker Spaniel English Setter Rat Terrier Boykin Spaniel Dogue de Bordeaux American Foxhound Mini Labradoodle Silky Terrier Akbash CBD for Dogs Resources Dog Age Calculator Dog BMI Calculator Dog Chocolate Toxicity Calculator Dog Food Calculator Dog Harness Size Calculator Dog Life Expectancy Calculator Puppy Weight Calculator Dog Water Intake Calculator Dog Crate Size Calculator Dog Onion Toxicity Calculator Dog Raisin Toxicity Calculator Pet Sitter Rates Calculator Dog Groomer Tip Calculator Dog Quality of Life Calculator Cost of Owning a Dog Calculator Raw Dog Food Calculator Dog Apparel Dog Shirts Dog Dad Shirts Dog Mom Shirts Cats Cat Litter Automatic Litter Box Cat Accessories Cat Collars Cat Feeder Cat Food Cat Grooming Cat Apparel Cat Shirts Cat Mom Shirts Animal Advocacy Animal Abuse Animal Laws Animal Rights Animal Testing How to Help Facts & Stats Our Campaigns Store About us Most Popular Dog Breeds: It’s Not a Competition! Monika Martyn July 25, 2023 0 Comments WorldAnimalFoundation.org is reader-supported. When you buy through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Learn More Most people choose a dog because a characteristic about the breed resonates with their personality or lifestyle. Others simply want to provide a good home to dogs needing rescue; no particular pedigree or distinction is a prerequisite. The best family dogs bring joy and fulfillment into our lives; whether they win the popularity contest hardly matters; we just love them! Regal and hardworking Labrador Retrievers aren’t too worried about being knocked off the pedestal by the charismatic French Bulldog. Frenchies will never make great hunting breeds, and Labs know they don’t fit on our laps despite sometimes trying. The point is all dogs bring unique traits and personalities into our midst, and we adore them for it. Choosing the right dog breed and understanding their temperament and needs makes for a better relationship. Here is a comprehensive list of some of the most popular dog breeds. Most Popular Dog Breeds Labrador retrievers ruled the AKC (American Kennel Club) top spot for over three decades. Congrats, that’s quite an achievement. Trends come and go, and this past year, the French Bulldog took the prize. Frenchies are a playful breed suitable for urban residents, and therein lies their charm. Bulldogs, Rottweilers, Beagles, Dachshunds, and Poodles have remained among popular dog breeds. French Bulldogs Classification: Non-sporting Group Weight: under 28lbs Temperament: Playful, intelligent, easygoing (OMG–that face!) Frenchies have characterful faces and require little exercise and grooming, making them rise among popular dog breeds. They can experience health issues, and chronic skin problems plague dog breeds with skin folds. Check our guide on how much does it costs to own a french bulldog. Labrador Retriever Classification: Sporting Group Weight: M 65-80lbs F 55-70lbs Temperament: Energetic, outgoing, friendly, and smart Labs are notoriously curious and love their peeps. They have webbed feet and stamina, are mostly obedient, and adore humans. Registration statistics place them #1 as the most popular service dog breed. Golden Retriever Classification: Sporting Group Weight: 55-75lbs Temperament: High intelligence, friendly, loyal, and devoted. Goldens are fun-loving, affectionate and slow to mature, and keep their puppy antics. Other dog breeds similar to Goldens are Chesapeake Bay Retrievers which have a blended resemblance to a yellow Labrador Retriever and a Golden Retriever mix. German Shepherds Classification: Herding Group Weight: 50-90lbs Temperament: Protective, instinctive, intelligent, valiant Regal shepherds are service dogs willing to work for their owners and instinctively protect. A highly skilled German Shepherd is a valuable resource for police and military action. Rin Tin Tin, a German Shepherd movie star, has a star on Hollywood’s Walk of Fame. Poodle Classification: Toy and Non-Sporting Group (3 classes) (formerly a hunting dog) Weight: Toy 4-6lbs, Mini 10-15lbs and Standard 40-70lbs Temperament: Confident, super smart, trainable, active, agile, loyal Despite their pedigree that portrays them as a tad snobbish, poodles have a naughty side. Although of German origin, it’s the national dog of France. Bulldogs Classification: Non-sporting Group Weight: 40-50lbs Temperament: Outgoing, brave, and calm Bulldogs have a unique take on life and prefer lounging over walking (due to their body design). Many bulldogs need caesarian surgery to deliver pups. The shape of a pup makes it difficult to pass through the birth canal. Rottweilers Classification: Working Group Weight: 80-135lbs Temperament: Protective, loyal, affectionate Rottweilers trace their lineage back to Roman times and are very hard-working, and are distant relatives to the Doberman Pinschers. Beagles Classification: Hound Group Weight: 20-30 pounds Temperament: Inquisitive, happy-go-lucky, and nose focused Beagles are famous hunting dogs, and their nose sometimes leads them to trouble. Dachshunds Classification: Hound Group Weight: 11-32lbs (Miniature or Standard) Temperament: Friendly, one-person loyal, playful Wiener dogs keep busy digging holes and chasing rodents and prefer indoor toilets, and they’re stubborn to a fault. German Shorthaired Pointers Classification: Sporting Group Weight: 45-70lbs Temperament: Intelligent, eager, outgoing A German Shorthaired Pointer is an active dog willing to perform, and its hunting instinct is strong. They fit well into active families and like kids. Most Popular Dog Breed in America Culture can influence the type of dogs we’re drawn to as a society. It’s a reflection of our lives and lifestyle. However, it doesn’t always make sense. Dog statistics suggest 900 million dogs worldwide, and 85% are unowned. Most popular breeds, like the beloved Great Dane, the alert Golden Retrievers, and the courageous Beagle, have earned their top dog spot in many hearts. Pembroke Welsh Corgis Classification: Herding Group Weight: 28-30lbs Temperament: Bright, loving, and engaged Pembroke Welsh Corgi are royalty and favorites of the Royal Family. Pembroke Welsh Corgis take their herding instinct seriously and are vocal about it and bark. The queen’s dogs continue to live at Windsor. Australian Shepherds Classification: Herding Group Weight: 40-65lbs Temperament: Smart, hard-working, eager to please, and devoted The Australian Shepherd is also known as the Blue Heelersor Pastor Dog. This breed is famous for its two-colored eyes. Yorkshire Terriers Classification: Toy Group Weight: 7lbs Temperament: Cuddly, feisty, and demanding Yorkies are a mighty breed despite their size, and this retired hunting dog prefers grown-ups. According to an independent survey, Yorkies don’t care what breed is the most registered breed or who is the new top dog. Ruff! Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Classification: Toy Group Weight: 13-18lbs Temperament: Sweet and loving, elegant, social Cavalier King Charles retains traits of their hunting past and doesn’t like being alone. They’re a playful breed among popular dog breeds in the UK and USA. Doberman Pinschers Classification: Working Group Weight: 60-100lbs Temperament: Loyal, protective, intuitive, brave, and loving Dobbies are in-your-face dogs, and where you go, they follow (no bias;). They are among the most popular dog breeds and still appear regularly on television as the most iconic fierce guard dog. Many Doberman Pinschers work as police or army service dogs. Boxers Classification: Working Group Weight: 65-80lbs Temperament: Energetic, smart, playful, and affectionate The Boxer dog is another ancient breed whose soulful/poker faces are depicted in art worldwide and get along with other breeds. Boxers are #16 on the AKC’s most popular dog breeds list. Not bad out of 200 popular dog breeds. Miniature Schnauzers Classification: Terrier Group Weight: 11-20lbs Temperament: Outgoing, intelligent, eager to please, versatile Schnauzers are formidable hunters and excellent family watchdogs. They’re popular dog breeds with terrier fans. Cane Corso Classification: Working Group Weight: 90-110lbs Temperament: Intelligent, loving, powerful Also known as the Italian Mastiff, this breed dates back to Roman times, when it served as a war dog. First-time dog owners might try a smaller pooch. Cane Corso is now #18 on the most popular dog breeds ranking. Great Danes Classification: Working Group Weight: M 140-175lbs F 110-140lbs Temperament: Outgoing, gentle, and reliable couch potato Despite their formidable size, this breed is patient with children and family-orientated. Marmaduke is one of the most famous Great Danes and a loveable comic character who enjoys Scooby snacks. The AKC ranks Danes at #19 according to registration statistics. Shih Tzu Classification: Toy Group Weight: 9-16lbs Temperament: Friendly, cuddly and loving, fun, and great with children. Shih Tzu makes great family additions and loves everyone, including cats. For those reasons, they remain among the most popular dog breeds. Top Dog Breeds Deciding on the type of dog breed, for example, working, sporting, or toy category, can help narrow down choices and compatibility. Wonder how many dogs are in the UStoday? It’s close to 90 million. The AKC suggests only 5% of those are purebred dogs, but the Humane Society pegs the number at 25%. The end of the pandemic has seen a surging increase in drop-offs that also affect popular dog breeds. Siberian Huskies Classification: Working Group Weight: 35-60lbs Temperament: Friendly, sneaky, loyal, and hard-working Famous for their feats in the Iditarod, Huskies are dependable and opportunists. A Husky is often mistaken for Alaskan Malamutes. Bernese Mountain Dogs Classification: Working Group Weight: M 80-115lbs F 70-95lbs Temperament: Docile, even-tempered, powerful endurance Bernese makes a great family addition. Super fun and gentle; bring a brush. Pomeranians Classification: Toy Group Weight: 3-7lbs Temperament: Curious, fearless, active, and feisty Poms descend from sleddogs but are vulnerable to attacks from hawks and owls. Boston Terriers Classification: Non-sporting Group Weight: 12-25lbs Temperament: Outgoing, entertaining (hence the tux), and smart Boston Terriers are very cuddly despite their fighting history. They’re the official dog of Massachusetts and one of the most popular dog breeds. Sergeant Stubby, of Boston heritage, is the most decorated war dog. Havanese Classification: Toy Group Weight: 7-13lbs Temperament: Intelligent, fearless, and friendly, natural entertainers These Cubans were on the brink of extinction but thankfully made a resurgence. English Springer Spaniels Classification: Sporting Group Weight: 40-50lbs Temperament: Playful, outgoing, and easy to train This Spaniel loves to swim and brings its owner gifts. One of the best dogs to train but need running rooming. Shetland Sheepdogs Classification: Herding Group Weight: 15-25lbs Temperament: Active, fun, smart, and eager Shetlands possess a keen intelligence and a need for mental activity. Grooming is not negotiable. Brittanys Classification: Sporting Group Weight: 30-40lbs Temperament: Quick-witted, fun and playful, eager to please Brittanys are energetic and don’t require stern reprimands. Keen scent dogs, they want you to be around 24/7. Cocker Spaniels Classification: Sporting Group Weight: 20-30lbs Temperament: Smart, gentle, and content Cockers understand how Labs must feel after being displaced by the Frenchie. They held the same title for 16 years. Border Collies Classification: Herding Group Weight: 30-55lbs Temperament: Hard working, affectionate, super intelligent, and trainable Border Collie dog breed works hard, and your wish is their command. Their feats are legendary. Most Owned Dog Breeds The most popular dog breed rankings are both good and bad. It’s good because great dog breeds and breeders deserve recognition. Sadly, popularity increases costs, dog theft, and overbreeding in unscrupulous puppy mills and can increase health concerns. Miniature American Shepherds Classification: Herding Group Weight: 20-40lbs Temperament: Active, versatile, very smart, and sturdy These mini shepherds have big personalities and demonstrate their loyalty. Beautiful color patterns. Belgian Malinois Classification: Herding Group Weight: 61-100lbs Temperament: Highly active, brave, smart, and loyal Mals are working dogs that need mental and physical stimulation and are second to none in work ethic. Belgian Malinois often wear a police or Navy SEALs uniform. Vizslas Classification: Sporting Group Weight: M 55-60lbs F 45-55lbs Temperament: Athletic, eager, loving, and dedicated These Hungarian hunting gun dogs are gentle dogs that reach up to 40mph and can maintain that speed. Perfect for people who love to run. Chihuahuas Classification: Toy Group Weight: 6lbs Temperament: Big on personality, capricious, imposing Chihuahuas are all about attitude and have it in spades, from charming to fierce. They’re North America’s oldest breed. Pugs Classification: Toy Group Weight: 14-18lbs Temperament: Loving, cuddly, adaptable The dogs of emperors, Pugs, are flexible family pets and adapt well. They’re not pugnaciousous. People sometimes confuse Pugs and Boston Bulldogs with French Bulldogs. Basset Hounds Classification: Hound Group Weight: 40-80lbs Temperament: loyal but independent, sturdy Bassets have a wicked nose and the endurance to match. They’re calm until there’s work to be done. Mastiffs Classification: Working Group Weight: M 160-230lbs F 120-170lbs (not a typo) Temperament: Gentle, protective, lovable, weary of strangers Mastiffs helped domesticate humanity and are our first animal BFFs. There are several prominent Mastiff breeds. Maltese Classification: Toy Group Weight: 7lbs Temperament: Fearless, affectionate, regal, and charismatic Maltese are another old breed who caught the attention of medieval crusaders. They may look dainty but are brave. Collies Classification: Herding Group Weight: M 60-75lbs F 50-65lbs Temperament: Devoted, athletic, smart, protective A pop culture icon, Collies dominated the most popular dog breed category for generations. English Cocker Spaniels Classification: Sporting Group Weight: 26-34lbs Temperament: Curious, willful, eager to please, charisma The English Cocker Spaniel dog breed is notorious for its ability to retrieve and personality. Least Owned Dog Breeds There’s an ongoing war between the most popular dog breeds and rare ones, yet they still attract curious owners. These are just some of those unique breeds, and dozens more exist. English Foxhounds Classification: Hound Group Weight: 60-75lbs Temperament: Dedicated, gentle, calm, obstinate English Foxhounds are postcard-hunting dogs depicted in art throughout history. This breed is seldom a pet but a dedicated pack member that performs their task. Though a registered breed, they don’t rank on the most popular dog breeds list. They come in at #199, so Labs have nothing to worry about. Norwegian Lundehunds Classification: Sporting Group Weight: M15-18lbs F 12-15lbs Temperament: Friendly and outgoing, athletic Lundehunds are unique dogs with six toes and pads, extremely flexible necks, and folding ears. They resemble the Spitz breed. Sloughis Classification: Hound Group Weight: 35-50lbs Temperament: Loving with owners, reserved with strangers, keen, intelligent Sloughis are a rare but ancient breed and a classic sighthound from Northern Africa. American Foxhounds Classification: Hound Group Weight: M 65-70lbs F 60-65lbs Temperament: Good-natured, dedicated to tasks, athletic, prone to depression American Foxhounds are keen hunters built for endurance and speed. They can become destructive if their physical and mental stimulation needs aren’t met. Belgian Laekenois Classification: Herding Group Weight: 55-65lbs Temperament: Intelligent, protective, and loving with family, keen to please Belgian Laekenois is one of four native breeds in Belgium. They resemble a Sheperd but have a wiry-curly coat that needs grooming. FAQ’s Most commonly asked questions about the most popular dog breeds. What Is the Most Popular Dog Breed? The French Bulldog unseated the resounding top-seated champion, the genuine Labrador Retriever, America’s All-Time Favorite Dog Breed, in 2023. The AKC tracks 200 of the most popular dog breeds in the purebred category. It doesn’t track mixed or designer breeds. What Are the Most Common Types of Dogs? In the USA, Frenchies, Labs, Golden Retrievers, German Shepherds, Poodles, Rottweilers, Dachshunds, Bulldogs, Beagles, and German Shorthaired Pointers are in the top spot of most popular dog breeds. What Is the Most Commonly Owned Dog Breed? According to the AKC, the French Bulldog is the most popular breed in the country, and the Labrador Retriever moved into second place. However, the AKC only ranks purebred and registered dog breeds.This list excludes popular designer groups like the Mini Labradoodle and other mixed breeds. Don’t forget many Americans don’t care about the breed and adopt Heinz57 breeds. Final Thought An astonishing 25% of dogs in shelters are purebreds–just saying. Always be leery of buying from a pet store, as many dogs come from puppy mills and have horrible breeding and care conditions they must endure before the scrubbed and polished, and sold. We’ve barely scratched the surface; there are 155 more purebreds that didn’t make this list. Many other popular dog breeds, like the American bully dog breeds, are on America’s most wanted list for other reasons. Pet owners face many considerations before committing to a purebred or mixed-breed dog. The number one thing that should matter about the most popular dog breeds is that they are loved and cared for. Monika Martyn Monika Martyn is a nomadic minimalist and published author. Her pet portfolio includes experience with over forty cats and dogs, and she becomes their surrogate and a valued pack member. One of her proudest accomplishments is typing while petting a fur baby on her lap. She also excels at dog-speak and cat-talk and is working on mastering fish lingo. Aside from her animal advocacy, she is passionate about the environment, plastic pollution, and living with less (not including chocolate and coffee). She practices yoga and meditation faithfully. She’s experienced living abroad and believes that together people can evoke change for the better. Or at least be kind to one another despite our differences. She has an uncanny knack for remembering people’s names. She’s proud of her two Pushcart Nominations, her debut novel, and her marriage. When she’s not writing, she’s thinking about writing. Monika believes that education is the biggest gift to humanity at any age. Leave a comment Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment*Name* Email* (Will not be published) Web Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Post Comment Latest Posts October 7, 2023 Wondering How Many Cows Are in the World? Global Cattle Population Data Revealed! October 7, 2023 Quantifying the Amazing Diversity of Life: How Many Animals Are in the World? October 7, 2023 11 Iconic Japanese Dog Breeds You’ll Want to Cuddle! October 7, 2023 Top 17 White Dog Breeds That Will Have You Smiling From Ear-to-Ear! October 6, 2023 The Top Most Popular Pets: A Comprehensive Guide to Choosing the Perfect Companion October 6, 2023 SpotOn Fence Reviews – Pricey or Perfect? Expert Analysis from First-Hand Experience October 6, 2023 43 Medium-Sized Dog Breeds That Fit Just Right in Every Home! October 6, 2023 Animal Captivity Statistics – Deprived of the Right to Freedom! October 5, 2023 15 Gorgeous Guard Dogs to Protect & Love You! October 4, 2023 Animal Testing Statistics – Exposing Cruelty in the Name of Science! World Animal Foundation WorldAnimalFoundation.org is a leading digital platform advocating for animal rights, responsible pet ownership, and compassionate awareness. WAF is not a non-profit organization, and we neither accept nor solicit donations or charitable contributions. Policy SettingsAbout us Legal Disclaimer Earnings Disclaimer Privacy Policy Contact Us Contact Us Email: info@worldanimalfoundation.org Phone: +1 315 203 2761 Copyrights 2023. All Rights are Reserved. WorldAnimalFoundation.org Today's Deal: $50 Discount on Halo 3+ GPS Dog Collar Claim Before it Expires + 

IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Shop a smart notebook for 64% off, a $7 beauty essential and more fan favoritesSKIP TO CONTENTToday LogoOn The Show3rd Hour of TODAY Hoda & JennaSunday TODAYShop the ShowShopShop the ShowPrime DaySteals & DealsNewsletterFashionHomeWellnessStart TODAYMental HealthWomen's HealthFitnessSleepDiet & NutritionParentsParenting TipsKids HealthBabiesFamilyLOLFoodRecipesCeleb ChefsFood TipsWhat to Cook This WeekSearchShare this —My SavedManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearch TodaySearchSectionsHealth & WellnessParentingFoodShopPop CultureNewsLifeStyleShowsTODAY3rd Hour of TODAYTODAY with Hoda & JennaSunday TODAY with Willie GeistWatch Full EpisodesMoreNewsLifeBooksTrendingRecipesRead With JennaAstrologyInspirational HolidaysRelationshipsTODAY TableHelpNewslettersStart TODAYHalloweenShop TODAY AwardsCiti Music SeriesListen All DayFollow todayMore BrandsNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoFacebookPinterestEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardTwitterLinkedinPetsThese 20 dog breeds are the most popular in America. Why?The Labrador retriever is top dog yet again. David Frei, who was the voice of the Westminster dog show for 27 years, weighs in on the popularity of some breeds.From left: David Frei, a Havanese and John O'Hurley at the National Dog Show on Nov. 16, 2019.NBC via Getty ImagesPrintApril 4, 2022, 8:05 PM UTCBy Jen ReederFor the 31st year in a row, the Labrador retriever was the most registered breed in the United States in 2021, according to registration data from the American Kennel Club. The March 15 announcement included rankings of 197 dog breeds based on more than 800,000 purebred puppies and dogs.The wonderful thing about purebred dogs is their predictability, according to David Frei, who was the voice of the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show for 27 years and co-hosts the National Dog Show and Beverly Hills Dog Show with “Seinfeld” actor John O’Hurley. Dogs are bred for specific traits, from appearance to temperament.“The reason we have so many breeds is that there are so many different kinds of people out there,” Frei told TODAY. So what predictable qualities make Labs the top dog? For that matter, what traits do the other popular breeds possess? No. 1 — Labrador RetrieverThe Labrador retriever has been the most registered breed in American for 31 straight years, but has never won “Best in Show” at the National Dog Show or Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show, to the consternation of many Lab lovers.Courtesy National Dog ShowIt’s hard to pin down one reason why the Labrador retriever is so beloved, but versatility has to be a big reason, according to Frei.“They’re great with kids, happy, well-adjusted, active, smart,” he told TODAY. “If dogs could talk, I know what a Labrador would say: ‘Me too, me too.’ They want to be doing what you’re doing.”The qualities that make Labs such terrific family dogs and hunting companions also help them excel as working dogs, he noted. For instance, Labs work as bomb and arson detection dogs; epilepsy and diabetic alert dogs; search-and-rescue dogs; conservation detection dogs; service dogs for people with mobility issues, post-traumatic stress disorder and autism; assistance dogs for people with hearing loss; and guide dogs.Trevor Thomas, aka the Blind Hiker, hiked over 13,000 miles of backcountry trails with a Labrador retriever from the nonprofit Guide Dogs for the Blind. He and Tennille, a black Lab, set a lot of firsts together. For example, Thomas became the first blind person to complete the nearly 500-mile Colorado Trail without a human guide, and Tennille was the first guide dog to finish it.She also knows more than 600 words and can locate brand name goods in the grocery store, to the astonishment of other shoppers. His new guide dog, a yellow Lab named Lulu, is proving equally smart and athletic — and shares a love of adventure.Trevor Thomas and his guide dog, Lulu, pause for a photo atop the Continental Divide in Colorado. Courtesy Trevor Thomas“Every day they amaze me with what they can do. And I try not to underestimate what they can do. I try to set my expectations and the bar very, very high. But even though I do that, they still seem to find a way to surprise me — and in a positive way,” Thomas, 52, told TODAY.But he’s not at all surprised that Labs have been America’s top dog for over three decades.“There is a reason for that,” he said. “They are the best dog.”No. 2 — French BulldogFrench bulldogCourtesy National Dog ShowFans of the canine character Stella on “Modern Family” won’t be surprised that French bulldogs, aka Frenchies, are so popular. In fact, there’s something inherently comedic about their looks — like their distinctive “bat ears” — and personality.“They’ve got kind of an old face almost, with a few wrinkles in it, but they also look like they’re young and energetic. They have a pretty unique expression,” Frei said. “They can be real clowns.”He said the world’s first French bulldog specialty show took place in New York City at the Waldorf Astoria in 1898. A champion Frenchie named Gamin de Pycombe perished on board the Titanic, which sank a week before the 1912 show.He noted that in 2021, French bulldogs were the most popular purebred dog in New York City, according to the AKC, which makes sense since their temperament, size and energy level is well-suited for apartment living.“You don’t need to go for a run with a Frenchie — you go for a walk,” he quipped. “People love the look. They’re very entertaining and fun to be around, and I think that’s what’s giving them a place on this list.”No. 3 — Golden RetrieverGolden retrieverCourtesy of National Dog ShowLike the Labrador retriever, a golden retriever has never won best in show at prestigious American dog shows like the Westminster Kennel Club Dog show or the National Dog Show — much to the consternation of fans of the beloved family dog. Frei said one of the qualities that make Labs and goldens so popular — an eagerness to please their people — might be the same trait that keeps them from winning in conformation competitions.“Sporting dogs like the golden and the Lab, they want to be in your world. They want to do whatever you’re telling them to do,” he said. “And some of these other dogs, like the terriers, they don’t care about their handlers — I say that half-jokingly. They were bred to look for trouble, so they're on their toes looking around saying, ‘What can I do now?’ And the Labs and goldens, they just say, ‘OK, what are we going to do now?’ looking at their people instead of looking at what’s going on around them.”It’s more important that with their golden fur, intelligence and friendly dispositions, golden retrievers have won the hearts of people around the world — including animal lover extraordinaire Betty White, who adored her golden retriever, Pontiac.No. 4 — German ShepherdGerman shepherdCourtesy Beverly Hills Dog ShowGerman shepherds gained celebrity status in the early 1900s with film stars Strongheart and Rin Tin Tin. Both dogs have stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. They’re also consistently in the top 10 most popular dogs thanks to their intellect, athleticism and versatility, according to Frei.“They really are the total dog,” he said. “They can do everything. They’re a companion animal. They do police work. They’re service dogs. They’re guide dogs. Their temperament and character lets them do just about anything that you would ask them to do. They’re a confident dog.”The regal dogs are also successful as show dogs. In fact, the champion German shepherd Manhattan, who won Westminster in 1987, is one of Frei’s favorite show dogs of any breed.No. 5 — PoodleStandard poodleCourtesy National Dog ShowPoodles — including toy, miniature and standard — round out the top five breeds for 2021. It’s a comeback for the breed that held the top spot from 1960 to 1982 but then went out of fashion for a spell.“People just have a misconception about poodles because of the haircut,” Frei lamented. “If I were the PR guy for poodles, I would say, 'Let’s let them be shown in a sporting cut.'”If I were the PR guy for poodles, I would say, 'Let’s let them be shown in a sporting cut.'David FreiHe knows how much work goes into the fastidious grooming and doesn’t want to disparage those efforts. Still, poodles were bred to be water retrieving dogs and the full coat protected their internal organs from the cold, he noted.“They’re great athletic dogs — I’d have a poodle in a minute,” he said. “They’re amongst the smartest breeds you could have, and they’ve got a size for everybody and a color for everyone. It’s a fun breed.”No. 6 — BulldogBulldogCourtesy National Dog ShowBulldogs are popular pets as well as school mascots — a bulldog is a mascot for more than 40 colleges and universities in America, according to Frei.“I always figure they’re the cartoonist’s dream because of that expression — it’s that kind of sour expression but they’re the furthest thing from being sour,” he said. “They’re great, fun family dogs.”No. 7 — BeagleBeagleCourtesy National Dog ShowFor starters, the classic “Peanuts” character Snoopy is a beagle. How can America not love this breed?Beagles love people but are also independent since they’ll follow their powerful noses anywhere — one reason they excel at sniffing out contraband at customs checkpoints or bedbugs in hotels.When a beagle named Uno won Westminster in 2008, mayhem ensued. The champion lived with Frei for half the year and the country’s love of the charismatic breed was on full display. Uno drew a crowd wherever they went, whether throwing out the first pitch at MLB baseball games (well, fetching a ball thrown by Frei) or riding on a Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade float with — you guessed it! — Snoopy.“He loved the attention and he loved doing things. He became a therapy dog with me and we went to five different Ronald McDonald houses around the country,” Frei recalled. “They’re a great all-American dog, you know?”No. 8 — RottweilerRottweilerCourtesy National Dog ShowFrei likes to call rottweilers “the middle linebacker of dogs” and said he loves the breed. But, as with any dog, it’s important to know what their temperament is like and what their training needs are before welcoming one home, he noted.“You’d better be smarter than your rottweiler if you’re going to get a rottweiler,” Frei said. “You have to be firm with them — let them know you’re in charge and that you love them and that you’re going to take good care of them. … They love to work. They need to work.”You’d better be smarter than your rottweiler if you’re going to get a rottweiler.David FreiRottweilers originally worked as drover dogs that drove the cattle to market. That required athleticism and toughness — “you have to take a hoof in the chest every once in a while,” as he noted.“Here’s my fun fact about rotties: the owners of the dogs, when they sold cattle in the market, put their purses with the money around the neck of the rottweiler. Nobody’s going to take that from the rottweiler,” he said. But Frei hopes people won’t get a rottweiler for the sake of seeming macho.“If you need a macho dog to show you’re macho, you aren’t macho,” he said.No. 9 — German Shorthaired PointerGerman shorthaired pointerCourtesy National Dog ShowActive people are often fans of the German shorthaired pointer because the dogs are so energetic and can be terrific running partners and hunting companions. With their webbed feet and water-repellent coat, they’re also fantastic swimmers.“We call German shorthaired pointers the SUV of sporting dogs because they can do it all,” Frei quipped. “They’re smart; they’re athletic. If you’ve got a German shorthaired pointer, you’d better be ready to go for long walks or runs every day if they need that.”No. 10 — DachshundWire-haired dachshundCourtesy National Dog ShowDachshunds come in different sizes and with three coat varieties — smooth-haired, wire-haired and long-haired — but they’re instantly recognizable by the public as charming “wiener dogs.” (Fun fact: With a wink to hot dogs, "Saturday Night Live" star Kenan Thompson had a beloved wiener dog named Nathan.)“They’re all going to be long, low and level,” Frei said. “They have a lot of terrier personality in them. They were bred to hunt badgers and probably other ‘bad guys,’ so they have a certain fearless temperament about them. They’re tough, little, solid dogs.”No. 11 — Pembroke Welsh CorgiPembroke Welsh corgiCourtesy National Dog ShowPembroke Welsh corgis are good enough for a queen — literally. Queen Elizabeth II surrounded herself with the stout little dogs. The internet loves them too, including their “butts” with the docked tails, which you’ll find emblazoned on T-shirts, hats and even sticking out from the inside of coffee cups.California resident and dog writer Elaine Gewirtz says her corgi, Midge, is a character — just like most corgis you’ll meet.“They’re not a breed that just sits and looks at you,” she told TODAY. Corgis excel at dog sports like agility and home pastimes like cuddling. The bright, intuitive dogs also love to make friends with people and other dogs, and are typically fascinated by what’s going on around them, she added. No. 12 — Australian ShepherdDavid Frei smiles with an Australian shepherd in 2019. Simon Bruty / Courtesy The National Dog ShowHiking trails, particularly in the West, often teem with Australian shepherds since they are so athletic. As a herding breed, Aussies are bred for stamina, so they’re adept on ranches and for long treks outside. They’re also fiercely intelligent. Be ready to offer plenty of training and exercise.No. 13 — Yorkshire TerrierYorkshire terrierCourtesy National Dog ShowThe Yorkshire terrier — recognizable by that long, luxurious coat — typically weighs in at just 7 pounds. But the Yorkie’s diminutive size doesn’t denote a small personality. In fact, the AKC’s breed standard includes, “The dog’s high head carriage and confident manner should give the appearance of vigor and self-importance.”Mission accomplished.No. 14 — BoxerBoxerCourtesy Beverly Hills Dog Show and National Dog ShowBoxers have a face that tends to bring a smile to ours. Plus, they’re playful, smart and affectionate; as the American Boxer Club notes, “The Boxer’s most notable characteristic is his desire for human affection.”No. 15 — Cavalier King Charles SpanielCavalier King Charles spanielCourtesy Beverly Hills Dog ShowPeople love Cavalier King Charles spaniels not only for their sweet, “lap-loving personalities” but also because they are multipurpose dogs, according to Kim Campbell Thornton, a dog writer and editor — and Cavalier enthusiast. “They’re happy to do dog sports, go on a hike or to the beach, or just be a couch potato with you. Whatever you want to do, they’re game,” she told TODAY. “Finally, their size makes them great travelers, which is important with so many people taking their dogs on trips with them these days.” No. 16 — Doberman Pinscher Doberman pinscher in good companyCourtesy National Dog ShowThe Doberman pinscher can have a fearsome reputation. But the dog “of yesterday’s scary movies” is still protective but now also a fun-loving athletic dog and “discerning companion,” according to the Doberman Pinscher Club of America. The intelligent dogs also boast qualities like fearlessness, loyalty and an energetic nature. As with all dogs, socialization and positive training is key. No. 17 — Great DaneGreat DaneCourtesy of National Dog Show“My running joke about the Great Dane is that my parents never got me a pony as a kid, so my Danes fill that purpose,” Colorado resident Susan Kohut told TODAY. Kohut has adopted four Great Danes from rescue organizations. (Purebred dogs can wind up in local shelters, and there are more than 450 AKC Rescue Network groups across the country.) She loves them for being goofy, silly, loyal and adaptable. Her current Dane, Eloise, will happily hike for 6 miles, but if the weather isn’t nice, she’s fine with a short walk and then a cuddle up on the couch.No. 18 — Miniature SchnauzerMiniature schnauzerCourtesy National Dog ShowThe miniature schnauzer’s beard makes the breed instantly recognizable — plus, they don't shed much. The spunky dogs are highly recommended for families with children by the AKC, which lists other positive attributes as being bright, friendly, trainable and fearless without aggression.No. 19 — Siberian HuskySiberian huskyCourtesy Beverly Hills Dog ShowThere’s no question that Siberian huskies are head turners — but they’re more than just a pretty face.Colorado resident Heather Mundt, a freelance writer and family travel expert, said she and her husband got their first husky in 1997 and fell in love with the breed’s love of exercise. (She was quick to mention that this affinity can make them “monsters” without enough of it and that they bore easily).“Huskies are always ready for a run or hike, so they’re great adventurers. They’re also beautiful but willful. Which means they’re tough to train. But I adore them, and they’ve always been great with kids,” she told TODAY. “The two we have now, Boris and Tasha, are pandemic rescues, and I was reluctant to get them because I hate losing my pets. But I’m so glad to have huskies in my life again because they are so entertaining. Plus I joke they’re my favorite children now that my boys are teens. At least the dogs are glad to see me.”No. 20 — Bernese Mountain DogJohn O'Hurley and David Frei smile with a Bernese mountain dog during a photo shoot for The National Dog Show on Aug. 19, 2019.Simon Bruty / National Dog ShowDriving through Switzerland — and in the city of Bern — you’ll see images of the Bernese mountain dog on postcards and souvenirs. It’s only natural that the Swiss would feel pride in the gentle giants known for being affectionate, hardy, strong, intelligent, even-tempered and eager to please.Here's a complete list of rankings of the top 197 dog breeds.Choosing the right dog for youBefore bringing home any dog, it’s important to realize what you’re getting into and learn about the care a dog will need, such as training. As Frei mentioned, “They aren’t born with an obedience degree.”It’s also crucial to work with responsible breeders whose motivation is to preserve the best traits of a breed and perform health checks, rather than backyard breeders just looking to profit, he added.“Responsible purebred dog breeders — heritage breeders — are fighting to keep some of these breeds alive. Not just to keep the breed alive, which they are in a lot of cases, but to make sure that the best of those traits in those breeds come forth,” he said. “They’re going to be a lifetime member of your family.”So choose that family member carefully and bear in mind that the most popular dogs might not be the right pets for everyone.Jen ReederJen Reeder is a contributor to the Pets section of TODAY.com and former president of the Dog Writers Association of America. Bylines include CNN, BBC News, Woman's World, Inside Your Dog's Mind and many other publications.PrintAboutContactHelpVisitTODAY AppsAD ChoicesPrivacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationCA NoticeNEW TERMS OF SERVICE (UPDATED JULY 7, 2023)CareersClosed CaptioningTODAY SitemapAdvertiseTODAY Store Shop TODAYSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2023 NBC UNIVERSALNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday Logo 

Skip To ContentHomeDonateRehomingMeet our dogsOur rehoming centresBallymenaBasildon BridgendCanterburyCardiffCumbriaDarlingtonDundeeEveshamGlasgowIlfracombeKenilworthLeedsLoughboroughManchesterMerseysideNewburySalisburyShorehamShrewsburySnettertonWest CalderWest LondonPopular breedsBeagleBorder CollieBorder TerrierBoxer ChihuahuaCocker SpanielDachshundFrench BulldogGerman ShepherdGreyhoundGolden RetrieverLabradorLurcherRottweilerShih TzuStaffordshire Bull TerrierSpringer SpanielWhippet Yorkshire TerrierMore popular breedsHow to adopt a dogPost adoption supportFostering a dogGiving up your dogDog adviceDog School1-2-1 training sessionsVirtual training classesTraining classes near youTraining tips and adviceTraining techniquesBasicsTraining at homeOut and aboutPrevent unwanted behaviourExtra training and tricksUnderstanding your dogLife with your dogLife at homeOutside the homeRecipes and enrichmentSeasonal adviceHealth and wellbeingVet care essentialsVisiting the vetVet care at homeGetting a dogAre you dog ready?Choosing your dogWhat is the right breed for me?How we helpLong term careFind forever homesSupport ownersTraining classesLets with petsPlan for the futureDomestic abuseHomelessnessShape the futureProfessionalsVeterinariansEducatorsEmployersDog walkersResearchersOur storiesSupport usDonateSponsor a dogMeet our sponsor dogsSponsor a dog as a giftVolunteerRolesVacanciesFundraiseFundraising guideFundraising ideasRunning eventsChallenge eventsPlay and winLotteryRaffleGive in memoryDonations in memoryPersonalised memorial tagsFuneral collections and tributesCampaigns and appeals Will you help give scared dogs a place to learn to love?End Greyhound racing in WalesDog owners experiencing homelessnessDog owners fleeing domestic abuseOur shopsCharity shopsOnline shopGifts and cardsDog tagsMore ways to giveCorporate partnershipsPayroll givingWills and legaciesBecome a memberPhilanthropic givingGive as you shopRecycle to help rescue dogsDonate pre-loved itemsAbout usWho we areWhat we doOur impactOur global workHow we fundraise Media centreContact usPopular breedsAll dogs are wonderful, no matter their breed. But you might discover that some breeds suit you, your family and your circumstances a bit better than others. Get to know the most popular breeds. All dogs are wonderful, no matter their breed. But you might discover that some breeds suit you, your family and your circumstances a bit better than others. Get to know the most popular breeds. AkitaAkitaAlaskan MalamuteAlaskan MalamuteAmerican BulldogAmerican BulldogBasset HoundBasset HoundBeagleBeagleBelgian MalinoisBelgian MalinoisBichon FriseBichon FriseBorder CollieBorder CollieBorder TerrierBorder TerrierBoston TerrierBoston TerrierBoxerBoxerBrussels GriffonBrussels GriffonBull TerrierBull TerrierCavalier King Charles SpanielCavalier King Charles SpanielCane CorsoCane CorsoChow ChowChow ChowChihuahuaChihuahuaCocker SpanielCocker SpanielDachshundDachshundDalmatianDalmatianDogue De BordeauxDogue De BordeauxEnglish BulldogEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogFrench BulldogGerman ShepherdGerman ShepherdGolden RetrieverGolden RetrieverGreyhoundGreyhoundGreat DaneGreat DaneJack Russell TerrierJack Russell TerrierLabradorLabradorLhasa ApsoLhasa ApsoLurcherLurcherPatterdale TerrierPatterdale TerrierPoodlePoodlePomeranianPomeranianPugPugRottweilerRottweilerSalukiSalukiSchnauzerSchnauzerScottish Terrier (Scottie)Scottish Terrier (Scottie)Shih TzuShih TzuSiberian HuskySiberian HuskySpringer SpanielSpringer SpanielSpitzSpitzStaffordshire Bull TerrierStaffordshire Bull TerrierWest Highland White TerrierWest Highland White TerrierWeimaranerWeimaranerWhippetWhippetYorkshire Terrier (Yorkie)Yorkshire Terrier (Yorkie)Are you ready for a dog? Getting a dog is a big decision, and an incredibly exciting one! Before you get a dog, here are some things you should consider. Should I get a dog? 10 questions to ask yourselfAre you ready for a dogShould I get a dog? 10 questions to ask yourse...How to choose a puppy from a litterChoosing your dogHow to choose a puppy from a litterTop 10 benefits of adopting from usAre you ready for a dogTop 10 benefits of adopting fr...Keep up with our pupdates!Sign up to our newsletter and get top dog training tips and behaviour advice straight to your inbox, as well as fun activities and plenty of pupdates. Get the newsletterUseful linksContact usModern slaveryDonateJobsMedia CentrePrivacyRehomingSign up for our newsletterWe'll send you monthly emails, packed with info about our work and pupdates about some of our favourite furry friends.Sign UpShare on TwitterShare on FacebookShare on InstagramShare on YoutubeShare on TikTok© 2023 Dogs TrustRegistered Charity Numbers: 227523 & SC037843 Donations are tax exempt and Gift Aid can be claimedRegistered withCookie Settings 

Skip to main content Online Bill Pay Access Online bill pay will be down for maintenance 10/17 at 5PM until 10/18. For more information, please read the News Release. A welcoming community • Embracing its rural character • Focusing on its prosperous future English Afrikaans Albanian Arabic Armenian Azerbaijani Basque Belarusian Bengali Bosnian Bulgarian Catalan Cebuano Chinese (Simplified) Chinese (Traditional) Croatian Czech Danish Dutch English Esperanto Estonian Filipino Finnish French Galician Georgian German Greek Gujarati Haitian Creole Hausa Hebrew Hindi Hmong Hungarian Icelandic Igbo Indonesian Irish Italian Japanese Javanese Kannada Khmer Korean Lao Latin Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Malay Maltese Maori Marathi Mongolian Nepali Norwegian Persian Polish Portuguese Punjabi Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovenian Somali Spanish Swahili Swedish Tamil Telugu Thai Turkish Ukrainian Urdu Vietnamese Welsh Yiddish Yoruba Zulu Contact Us Facebook Twitter Search Departments Board of Supervisors Board of Supervisors Meeting Schedule Meetings & Agendas Public Comment Form Strategic Priorities Watch a Meeting Commissioner of the Revenue Community Development & Code Compliance Building Inspections Code Compliance Environmental Planning & Zoning County Administration County Attorney Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Courts System Clerk of the Circuit Court Drug Court General District Court Jury Duty Juvenile/Domestic Court Sixth District Court Service Unit/Dept. of Juvenile Justice Elections and Voter Registration (Registrar) Engineering & Utilities Finance Department Documents & Reports Fraud, Waste & Abuse Hotline OpenGov Financial Transparency Portal Policies Procurement General Services Waste Management Human Resources Jobs Information Technology Parks & Recreation Public Information Office Real Estate Assessor Social Services State Agencies & Other Departments James River Soil & Water Prince George Health Department Virginia Cooperative Extension / 4-H Treasurer's Office County Staff Links Large File Transfer Wellness Portal Public Safety Animal Services & Adoption Center County Dog Licenses Pet Adoption CodeRED Notification Commonwealth's Attorney Crime Solvers Drug Court Emergency Management Communication During an Emergency Emergency Preparedness Sign-Up for CodeRed Alerts Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) Fire and EMS Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC) Police Department Employment Forms & Permits Reports, Records and Freedom of Information Act Riverside Criminal Justice Agency Sheriff's Office Home Incarceration Jury Duty Victim/Witness Assistance Program Protective Orders in Virginia Residents Online Bill Pay Broadband in Prince George County Animal Services & Adoption Center Citizens' Wellness Portal Community Development & Code Compliance Building Inspections Code Compliance Environmental Planning and Zoning General Services Waste Management Education Power Outage Maps Dominion Energy Prince George Electric Co-op Southside Electric Co-op Farmers' Market Food Bank Library Parks & Recreation Prince George Health Department Property & Taxes Commissioner of Revenue County Roads Engineering and Utilities Real Estate Assessor's Office Treasurer's Office Social Services Housing Office Senior Task Force Voter Information County Newsletter The County Connection Business Economic Development Department Available Properties Demographics Document Center Exit 45 Strategic Plan Hopewell-Prince George Chamber of Commerce Incentives Economic Development Authority Starting and Growing Your Business Adopt-A-Sign Visitors Annual Events Directory Hospitals Lodging Restaurants Shopping Outdoor Recreation Entertainment Hopewell-Prince George Visitor Center James River National Wildlife Refuge Petersburg Area Regional Tourism Prince George County Regional Heritage Center Prince George, The Man Sports Tourism I Want to . . . Apply for/Obtain: Apply for a Job Business License Citizen Property Complaint CodeRED Alerts Dog license Water/Wastewater Service Citizen Request Portal Get information The County Connection County Newsletter (Print Edition) County Code Items for Public Surplus Online Interactive Maps Public Notices Social Media Policy Voter Information Learn About PG County Government Contact A Department Citizen Boards & Commissions Department Functions Governmental Structure Pay a bill Online Bill Pay Watch a Meeting The 25 most popular dog breeds in America this year ... and the rarest Home News ListNews Post The 25 most popular dog breeds in America this year ... and the rarest These rankings indicate the relative popularity of different breeds among the 589,868 purebred dogs, mostly puppies, that joined the nation’s oldest dog registry last year. Registration is voluntary. Here are the nation’s most popular purebreds, according to American Kennel Club rankings released Friday: 25. Shetland sheepdogs 24. Pomeranians 23. Bernese Mountain Dogs 22. Havanese 21. Boston terriers 20. Shih Tzu 19. Doberman Pinschers 18. Miniature schnauzers 17. Great Danes 16. Cavalier King Charles Spaniels 15. Siberian huskies 14. Boxers 13. Australian shepherds 12. Yorkshire terriers 11. Dachshunds 10. Pembroke Welsh corgis 9. German shorthaired pointers 8. Rottweilers 7. Beagles 6. Poodles 5. Bulldogs 4. French bulldogs 3. Golden retrievers 2. German shepherd 1. Labrador retriever AP FILE And the rarest breed ... English foxhounds The English foxhound is the rarest breed in the new rankings. The sizable, high-stamina and vocal hounds have a long history in the U.S. but aren’t often found as purely house pets. Fans tend to deploy the dogs for their traditional, pack-hunting purpose. “It’s a beautiful breed. I just don’t think people see them enough to know about them,” says AKC spokeswoman Brandi Hunter. AP FILE Share this page × Share this page Copy and paste this code into your website. <a href="http://www.princegeorgecountyva.gov/news_detail_T6_R3103.php">Your Link Name</a> Share this page on your favorite Social network Facebook Twitter Reddit Close PRINCE GEORGE COUNTYVIRGINIA Contact Us © Copyright 2021 Prince George County, VA | Sitemap All rights reserved. Powered by revize, Government Website Experts. Login Close Read More 

SearchSubscribeMy ArticlesGH+ Member PortalProduct ReviewsHolidaysHome IdeasFood & RecipesAll RecipesBeauty & StyleHealthLifeAbout UsAwardsEventsNewsletterFollowShopPromotionsOther EditionsPrivacy NoticeTerms Of UseSkip to ContentProduct ReviewsLifeFoodBeautyHealthSubscribesign inBest Halloween CostumesBest Couples CostumesBarbie Costume IdeasEasy Last-Minute Costumes to DIYThe Best Halloween MoviesLifePetsThe 10 Most Popular Dog Breeds in the CountryThe 10 Most Popular Dog Breeds in the CountryDid your best friend make the list?By Caroline PicardUpdated: Mar 20, 2019saved contained iconAn empty outlined icon indicating the option to save an itemSave ArticleDog lovers, perk up your ears. The American Kennel Club just revealed the top breeds for 2019, and lots of favorite companions are back on top. Labs have reigned supreme as the number one pick for more than quarter of a century now, but there are a few surprises among the ranks. Chances are you know someone who's gotten a French Bulldog in the past few years — and it's easy to see why. Those cute pups have ridden their wave of popularity all the way to the fourth place.Check out the 10 most popular breeds below, and head over to the AKC website to see more about the list.1 Labrador RetrieversGetty ImagesThese friendly and active pups have held the top spot the past 28 years in a row. "This is a do-everything breed that needs to be with its humans," long-timer breeder Erin Henlon-Hall told the AKC. "It personifies the definition of versatility — hunting, showing, family, dock diving, tracking, obedience. It’s as American as baseball, hot dogs, and apple pie."RELATED: A Definitive Ranking of the 25 Absolute Cutest Dog Breeds2 German ShepherdsGetty ImagesThese trusted companions often work as police dogs and service dogs because they're fiercely loyal to their main caretakers.3 Golden RetrieversGetty ImagesThis intelligent, friendly breed is basically the movie star of the group with starring roles on Full House, Air Bud, and Homeward Bound.RELATED: The Top 10 Smartest Dog BreedsAdvertisement - Continue Reading Below4 French BulldogsGetty ImagesFrenchies have big personalities but require minimal exercise. It's no wonder the big-eared pooches are also the top choice in New York, San Francisco, and Miami, the AKC announced. RELATED: The Best Apartment Dogs for City Dwellers5 BulldogsGetty ImagesA presidential pick, both Calvin Coolidge and Warren Harding owned these dignified, courageous canines.6 BeaglesGetty ImagesCurious and merry, beagles will follow their noses anywhere (and often into trouble).RELATED: 35 Small Dog Breeds That Make for Perfect CompanionsAdvertisement - Continue Reading Below7 PoodlesGetty ImagesThey come in standard, miniature, and toy size varieties, but all poodles are considered one (extremely intelligent) breed. As for that fancy haircut, the "poodle clip" is designed to protect the joints and organs in cold water — even though most work as family dogs now.8 RottweilersGetty ImagesKnown as protective guardians, Rottweilers can have a softer side as loving and loyal companions to their owners. 9 German Shorthaired PointersBranstonandTwiglet//Getty Images"GSPs" are known as great hunting and field dogs because of their intelligence and strong sense of smell.Advertisement - Continue Reading Below10 Yorkshire TerriersGetty ImagesFun fact: Yorkies became a fashionable pet in the late Victorian era, but they actually started off as vermin catchers in clothing mills. RELATED: 15 Miniature Dog Breeds That Are Just Too CuteCaroline PicardContributing WriterCaroline is a writer and editor with almost a decade of experience. From 2015 to 2019, she held various editorial positions at Good Housekeeping, including as health editor, covering nutrition, fitness, wellness, and other lifestyle news. She's a graduate of the Medill School of Journalism and dreams of the day Northwestern will go back to the Rose Bowl. Most Popular Dog BreedsThese 22 Hypoallergenic Dogs Don't Shed The 20 Best Dogs for Kids and FamiliesThese 43 Small Dogs Will Always Look Like PuppiesThe Most Adorable Toy Dog BreedsAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowTop 20 Smartest Dog Breeds10 Strongest Dog Breeds 8 Calm Dog Breeds With All of the ChillThe Best Guard Dogs to Protect Your Home15 Quiet Dog Breeds That Rarely Bark The Friendliest Medium-Sized Dog Breeds to AdoptA Definitive Ranking of the Cutest Dog Breeds45 Best Large Dog BreedsAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowSubscribeGive GH as a GiftOther Hearst SubscriptionsNewsletterAbout UsContact UsWork for Good HousekeepingMedia KitAdvertise OnlineCustomer ServiceEvents & PromotionsGiveawaysA Part of Hearst Digital MediaGood Housekeeping participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites.©2023 Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Privacy NoticeCA Notice at CollectionYour CA Privacy Rights/Shine the LightDAA Industry Opt OutTerms of UseSite MapCookies Choices 

Select Region United States United Kingdom Germany India Australia Italy Canada Credit Cards Credit Cards Credit Cards Compare Credit Cards Best Credit Cards 2023 Credit Card Comparison Best Travel Credit Cards Best Cash Back Credit Cards Best 0% APR Credit Cards Best Balance Transfer Credit Cards Best Rewards Credit Cards Best Airline Credit Cards Best Credit Cards for International Travel Best Credit Cards For Bad Credit Best Student Credit Cards Best Secured Credit Cards Best First Credit Cards Best Credit Cards For No Credit Best Gas Credit Cards Compare Business Cards Best Business Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards For Travel Best Cash Back Business Credit Cards Best 0% APR Business Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards For Startups Credit Card Reviews Capital One Venture X Chase Sapphire Preferred American Express Platinum Chase Sapphire Reserve American Express Gold Wells Fargo Active Cash More Credit Card Reviews Credit Cards By Issuer Best Wells Fargo Credit Cards Best American Express Credit Cards Best Chase Credit Cards Best Capital One Credit Cards Best Discover Credit cards Calculators Credit Card Interest Calculator Balance Transfer Calculator Credit Card Payoff Calculator Credit Score Best Credit Monitoring Services How To Check Your Credit Score What Is A Good Credit Score Credit Repair Best Credit Repair Companies How To Fix Your Credit In 7 Easy Steps How Much Does Credit Repair Cost? Loans Loans Loans Personal Loans Best Personal Loans Personal Loan Rates Compare Personal Loans Best Debt Consolidation Loans Best Low-Interest Personal Loans Best Personal Loans For Fair Credit Best Bad Credit Loans Best Joint Personal Loans Easiest Personal Loans Best Wedding Loans Best Personal Loans For Veterans Student Loans Best Student Loan Refinance Lenders Best Student Loans Best Parent Loan For College Best Low-Interest Student Loans Best Graduate Student Loans Best Medical School Loans Lenders To Refinance Parent PLUS Loans Student Loan Forgiveness FAQ Student Loan Forgiveness Programs Student Loan Calculator Student Loan Refinance Calculator Business Loans Best Business Loans Best Business Lines Of Credit Best Working Capital Loans Best Unsecured Business Loans Best Same-Day Business Loans Best Startup Business Loans Best Business Loans For Bad Credit Fast Approval Business Loans Business Loan Calculator Auto Loans Auto Loan Rates Auto Loan Refinancing Rates Auto Loan Refinancing Lenders Mortgages Mortgages Mortgages Home Buying & Refinancing Best Mortgage Lenders Best Mortgage Refinance Lenders Best Online Mortgage Lenders Best VA Mortgage Lenders Best USDA Mortgage Lenders Best Mortgage Lenders for FHA Loans When Should You Refinance? Mortgage Rates Today's Mortgage Rates Current Mortgage Rates: Compare Today’s Rates Today's Mortgage Refinance Rates Current Mortgage Refinance Rates 30 Year Mortgage Rates 15 Year Mortgage Rates 10 Year Mortgage Rates Today’s VA Mortgage Rates Today’s VA Refinance Rates Historical Mortgage Rates Home Equity Loans Best Home Equity Loan Lenders Best Home Equity Loan Rates Home Equity Loan Calculator Best HELOC Lenders Best HELOC Rates Calculators Mortgage Amortization Calculator Mortgage APR Calculator Cash-Out Refinance Calculator Mortgage Refinance Calculator Mortgage Calculator HELOC Calculator Real Estate How Much House Can I Afford? Calculator Cost of Living Calculator Housing Market Predictions Most Affordable Cities To Buy A Home Insurance Insurance Insurance Car Insurance Best Car Insurance Cheap Car Insurance Online Car Insurance Quotes Car Insurance Calculator Cost Of Car Insurance Best Car Insurance In Florida Best Car Insurance In California Best Car Insurance In Texas Travel Insurance Best Travel Insurance Best Covid Travel Insurance Best Cruise Travel Insurance Cancel For Any Reason Insurance How Much Is Travel Insurance? Cheap Travel Insurance Travel Insurance & Destinations Life Insurance Best Life Insurance Best Term Life Insurance Best Senior Life Insurance No-Exam Life Insurance Compare Life Insurance Quotes How Much Is Life Insurance? Cheap Life Insurance Life Insurance Calculator Homeowners Insurance Best Home Insurance Companies Compare Home Insurance Quotes Home Insurance Calculator Average Cost Of Homeowners Insurance How Much Home Insurance Do I Need? Renters Insurance Best Renters Insurance Cheap Renters Insurance How Much Is Renters Insurance? Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Pet Insurance Quotes: Compare and Save Is Pet Insurance Worth It In 2023? Cheap Pet Insurance How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? Pet Insurance Pre-Existing Conditions Health Insurance Best Health Insurance Companies Short-Term Health Insurance Best Disability Insurance Health Insurance for Small Business Best Dental Insurance Companies Best Vision Insurance Companies Business Insurance Best Small Business Insurance Commercial Auto Insurance General Liability Insurance Cyber Liability Insurance Business Interruption Insurance Banking Banking Banking Best Banks Best Banks Best Online Banks Best Credit Unions Best Budget Apps Bank Promotions & Bonuses Best Bank Bonuses & Promotions Capital One Promotions Chase Promotions Wells Fargo Checking Account Bonus Bank Of America Promotions US Bank Promotions CDs Best CD Rates CD Rates Today CD Interest Rates Forecast 3 Month CD Rates 6 Month CD Rates 1 Year CD Rates 3 Year CD Rates 5 Year CD Rates 10 Year CD Rates No Penalty CD Rates Jumbo CD Rates Savings Best Savings Accounts Best High Yield Savings Accounts Best Savings Accounts For Kids Best Business Savings Accounts Best Money Market Accounts Checking Best Checking Accounts Best High Yield Checking Accounts Best Teen Checking Accounts Best Student Checking Accounts Best No Fee Checking Accounts Best Business Checking Accounts Taxes Best Tax Software Best Tax Apps Tax Relief Services Tax Brackets 2023 Income Tax Calculator Paycheck Calculator Money Transfer International Money Transfer Currency Calculator Investing Investing Investing Investing Basics Best Online Brokers Best Online Brokers For Day Trading Best Investment Apps Best Investment Management Apps Best Robo Advisors Gold Price Today Best Gold IRA Companies Wealth Financial Advisors Wealth Advisors Wealth Management Financial Planner Small Business Small Business Small Business Forming A Business Best LLC Services Best Registered Agent Services How to Start an LLC Cost to Form an LLC HR & Payroll Best Payroll Services Best HR Software Best PEO Services Best Recruiting Software Web Design & Hosting Best Website Builder Best Web Hosting Services Best Blogging Platforms Best Web Hosting Services VoIP & Communication Best VoIP Services Best Cheap VoIP Services Best Business Cell Phone Plans How to Get a Free Business Phone Number Project Management Best Project Management Software Best Free Project Management Software Best Gantt Chart Software Privacy & Security Best VPNs Best Cheap VPN Best Antivirus Software Best Password Managers Legal Legal Legal Find A Lawyer Best Personal Injury Lawyers Best Car Accident Lawyers Best Truck Accident Lawyers Best Motorcycle Accident Lawyers Legal Services Best Online Divorce Services Best Trademark Registration Services Best Name Change Services Best Prepaid Legal Services USA UK DE IN AU IT CA USA | Change Region Back to Forbes.com USA UK DE IN AU IT CA USA | Change Region You might be using an unsupported or outdated browser. To get the best possible experience please use the latest version of Chrome, Firefox, Safari, or Microsoft Edge to view this website. advisor Pet Insurance Advertiser Disclosure Top 20 Most Popular Cat Breeds Sydni EllisContributorSydni Ellis is a freelance writer whose work has appeared in HuffPost, Motherly, Romper, SheKnows, POPSUGAR, and other publications focused on lifestyle, entertainment, parenting, and wellness. She has a Master of Journalism from the University of North Texas and a Best Mama award from her three little boys (at least, that’s what she thinks the scribbled words on the card say). When she isn’t busy singing along to Disney movies and catching her husband up on the latest celebrity gossip, she can almost always be found with a good book and an iced coffee in hand.Sydni Ellis Sydni EllisContributorSydni Ellis is a freelance writer whose work has appeared in HuffPost, Motherly, Romper, SheKnows, POPSUGAR, and other publications focused on lifestyle, entertainment, parenting, and wellness. She has a Master of Journalism from the University of North Texas and a Best Mama award from her three little boys (at least, that’s what she thinks the scribbled words on the card say). When she isn’t busy singing along to Disney movies and catching her husband up on the latest celebrity gossip, she can almost always be found with a good book and an iced coffee in hand.Contributor Kelly Anne SmitheditorI'm a senior consumer finance reporter for Forbes Advisor. I cover what's going on in the news and how it affects your bottom line. When I'm not writing articles, I author the Forbes Advisor Weekly Newsletter. My work has been included in a variety of publications including Reader's Digest, NASDAQ, Bankrate and more. I've been featured as a personal finance expert in outlets like CNBC, Yahoo! Finance and CBS News Radio. I have a master's degree in international communication studies and I'm currently based in Paris, France. Follow me on Twitter at @keywordkelly.Reviewed ByKelly Anne SmithKelly Anne SmitheditorI'm a senior consumer finance reporter for Forbes Advisor. I cover what's going on in the news and how it affects your bottom line. When I'm not writing articles, I author the Forbes Advisor Weekly Newsletter. My work has been included in a variety of publications including Reader's Digest, NASDAQ, Bankrate and more. I've been featured as a personal finance expert in outlets like CNBC, Yahoo! Finance and CBS News Radio. I have a master's degree in international communication studies and I'm currently based in Paris, France. Follow me on Twitter at @keywordkelly.editorReviewed ByPublished: Sep 14, 2023, 11:13am Editorial Note: We earn a commission from partner links on Forbes Advisor. Commissions do not affect our editors' opinions or evaluations. Getty Creative Cats are amazing companions, many of whom can learn tricks just like dogs, are good with kids and other pets and are sociable creatures. There are cats who love to curl up on their owners laps and cats who enjoy climbing to the top of your fridge and other high places. There are also many cat breeds that are easy to groom, which makes them a fairly low-maintenance pet. The Cat Fanciers’ Association releases a list of the most popular cat breeds globally every year, including some you may expect (like the Siamese) and others you may have never heard of (the Norwegian forest cat). If you’re adding a new cat to your family, consider getting pet insurance to help cover its health care costs—and your wallet—as it ages through life. Is Your Cat Covered? Get Peace of Mind With the Best Pet Insurance of 2023 Learn More Top 20 Most Popular Cat Breeds Rank Breed 1. Ragdoll 2. Main coon cat 3. Devon Rex 4. Exotic shorthair 5. Persian 6. British shorthair 7. Abyssinian 8. Domestic non-pedigreed cats 9. Scottish fold 10. Sphynx 11. Siberian 12. American shorthair 13. Bengal 14. Russian blue 15. Norwegian forest cat 16. Oriental shorthair 17. Siamese 18. Cornish rex 19. Selkirk rex 20. Birman (List courtesy of the Cat Fanciers’ Association) 1 Ragdoll Getty Creative The Ragdoll is a blue-eyed beauty, ranking No. 1 on CFA’s list of most popular cat breeds for four years in a row. This breed is easily recognized by their fluffy, long-haired coats and mellow disposition. They’re known to be affectionate, playful and intelligent. They’re also revered for their intelligence and friendly manner—and even get along with other animals and children. Ragdolls don’t shed as much as other cats due to their soft outer hair layer, but they will still need to be groomed during the change of seasons to keep their coat looking shiny and strong. Weight/Size 10-20 pounds Weight/Size 10-20 pounds Height 15-26 inches Life Expectancy 15-25 years Coat & Color A silky, long coat that can come in seal, blue, chocolate, lilac, red, and cream, with darker points on the face, legs, tail and ears. Characteristics Blue eyes with long, light-colored coats. Easy disposition, gentle and friendly with animals and humans. 2. Maine Coon Cat Getty Creative Known as gentle giants, the Maine coon cat can weigh up to 20 pounds, making them the largest of pedigreed cats, according to CFA. This breed is a native American long-haired cat and is the official cat of Maine. They are known for being sturdy and rugged, with a shaggy coat that keeps them warm. Maine coon cats are friendly, great with kids and known for their incredible intelligence. They often like to play, especially in the water, and their paws are well-tufted to make walking in snow a breeze. Their coats only require occasional grooming to keep them silky smooth. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Height 10-16 inches Life Expectancy 10-15 years Coat and Color Rugged coat with three different lengths of fur and a long, fluffy tail. Characteristics Intelligent, kind, and companionable, with about 75 different color combinations 3. Devon Rex Getty Creative With its oversized ears and large eyes, the Devon rex cat has a distinct look. They are a fun-loving breed with an attitude, who are known for being loyal and always by your side. Devon rex cats can be crafty, and tend to do well around other people and animals, including other cats, dogs, birds, ferrets and even rabbits. Their coats are unique and soft, with either short or wavy fur, and can easily be kept groomed by simply rubbing a warm washcloth through their fur. They are moderately active, so make sure to have lots of toys on hand. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 5-9 pounds Height 12-14 inches Life Expectancy 14-17 years Coat and Color Fine, thin hair that is naturally oily and can come in many colors that are either curly or soft and suede-like Characteristics Large, bat-like ears, large oval eyes and a short coat 4. Exotic Shorthair Getty Creative Squishy, soft, and cuddly, the exotic shorthair is like the teddy bear of cats. They are similar to their Persian cousins, but with a thicker, shorter coat that doesn’t require as much grooming. These kitties are a quiet breed, perfect for cat naps on your lap or playing easy games with their owner. Because of their short hair, you can get away with brushing them about once a week, making them ideal for busy families. The exotic shorthair is known for its round, flat face and a coat that comes in many different colors. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 8-15 pounds Height 10-12 inches Life Expectancy 8-11 years Coat and Color Popular coat colors include silver, bi-color, red tabby, and brown tabby. Characteristics Quiet, calm, and friendly, with a teddy bear like face and fluffy body 5. Persian Getty Creative Many people consider Persian cats “the epitome of feline beauty.” The breed traveled from Persia and Iran among rare spices and jewels, and they are beautiful to behold. Like the exotic shorthair, Persian cats are quiet and charming. These cats have long coats that require daily brushing and occasional baths to prevent mats and tangles. Persian cats have luxurious coats in white, black, blue, cream, chocolate and red. Despite their easy-going nature, Persian cats will also need daily exercise to stay happy and healthy. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 8-15 pounds Height 8-10 inches Life Expectancy 8-11 years Coat and Color White, blue, chocolate, lilac, black, silver, gold, tabby, and bicolor and more Characteristics Round head, small ears, big eyes and a long, luxurious coat; they are quiet and easy-going 6. British Shorthair Getty Creative These stocky, plush cats are one of the oldest English breeds known for their hunting skill and strength. The British shorthair is sometimes called the “British blue” due to their dense blue-gray coat, but their fur can come in almost any color and pattern. These cats are happy to entertain themselves or spend time with their owner and are typically sedentary. As far as grooming needs go, the British shorthair may require extra brushing during spring and fall shedding, otherwise, weekly brushing should suffice. They are calm and easygoing with other humans and animals, affectionate, and easily trained. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 8-16 pounds Height 11-14 inches Life Expectancy 12-20 years Coat & Color A blue-gray coat is popular, but a British shorthair can come in any color or pattern Characteristics Textured coat, stocky build and calm demeanor 7. Abyssinian Getty Creative Reminiscent of ancient Egyptian cats, the Abyssinian breed has a long, arched neck, muscular body, big ears and almond-shaped eyes. Abyssinians are one of the oldest known cat breeds with a unique ticked coat that appears translucent and can come in many different colors. They are smart, athletic, companionable and curious—and can often be found perching from the highest point in the room, like the top of a fridge or bookshelf. This breed requires only minimal brushing to maintain its pretty coat. Abyssinians are both graceful and playful, who enjoy being around people and being the center of attention. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 6-12 pounds Height 8-10 inches Life Expectancy 14-12 years Coat & Color Ticked coat that can be cinnamon, chocolate, ruddy, blue, fawn, lilac or silver Characteristics Muscular body, large ears, arched neck that resembles cats from ancient Egypt 8. Domestic Non-Pedigreed Cats Getty Creative Domestic non-pedigreed cats are the felines often found outdoors and in rescues, which are not considered an intentionally bred breed. These cats (also known as companion cats or household cats) date back to the days of Pharaohs. Although these cats were targeted during the witch hunts of the 1500s and 1600s, they survived and eventually gained favor in people’s hearts and homes again. Domestic non-pedigreed cats all look different with varying personalities and temperaments, hair colors and styles, activity levels and features. Like their pedigreed counterparts, these cats are allowed to participate in shows. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size Varies Height Varies Life Expectancy Varies Coat & Color Varies Characteristics Varies 9. Scottish Fold Getty Creative Known for its round head and large, round eyes, Scottish fold cats are best known for their folded ears, which point down toward the head like a fitted cap and contribute to their adorable, rounded face. The Scottish Fold has a short, dense coat and a medium-sized body. This breed has a loving nature with a quiet voice and relaxed personality that doesn’t require much fuss to be happy. They also don’t require extensive grooming or exercise and are loyal to their human companions. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 7-10 pounds Height 8-10 inches Life Expectancy 11-14 years Coat and Color All colors and patterns, short and long hair Characteristics Folded or straight ears with round eyes and a round head; sweet, loyal demeanor 10. Sphynx Getty Creative Named after the ancient Egyptian cat sculpture, the sphynx is easily recognizable with their small heads, huge pointed ears and hairless body. They come in a variety of colors and patterns in a fine, peachy down fuzz. They have loose skin, which makes them extra wrinkly. The breed is medium-sized and sturdy and can be silly and clumsy. This social breed is mischievous and enjoys human attention and lots of activity. They need regular bathing every few months to remove build-up of body oils. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 7-14 pounds Height 8-10 inches Life Expectancy 15+ years Coat and Color Hairless breed that comes in a variety of colors and patterns Characteristics Large ears, hairless body, outgoing personality 11. Siberian Getty Creative Siberian cats are considered a “national treasure” in Russia, according to the CFA, and have been in the U.S. since 1990. This cat is strong and alert with a dense triple coat and bushy tail. Their coats can come in all color and pattern combinations, with only minimal brushing required to keep tangles at bay. They are an affectionate, playful breed that loves spending time with people and interacting with toys. Though not proven scientifically, this breed is considered hypoallergenic, which makes them great companions for those with sensitive allergies. Siberians often quietly mew, chirp and purr when they are happy. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 17-26 pounds Height 9-11 inches Life Expectancy 11-18 years Coat and Color All colors and patterns on a medium-to-long hair triple coat Characteristics Affectionate, playful and intelligent 12. American Shorthair Getty Creative After coming over with early American settlers and catching the stowaway rats onboard ships, the American Shorthair developed a reputation for being strong, hardy cats with excellent hunting skills. They are medium-to-large sized cats with a short coat that is often a tabby, although it can come in many different colors. This breed is friendly, good-natured and great as family pets. They are easy to train and don’t require intensive grooming. This adaptable breed can be independent at times, which makes them suitable for busy families or quiet homes. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 6-15 pounds Height 10-14 inches Life Expectancy 15+ years Coat and Color Short, wiry coat in traditional colors, including a tabby Characteristics Adaptable, independent, easygoing and friendly 13. Bengal Getty Creative Bengals are domestic cats with vivid spots or distinctive marbling, which are equally beautiful. They are the only domestic cat breed with rosettes like the markings on leopards and jaguars. Bengals are confident like their wild counterparts, and known for being active, curious and energetic. They have a plush coat that is both soft and tough, highly contrasted markings, and large oval eyes. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 6-15 pounds Height 14-18 inches Life Expectancy 12-20 years Coat and Color Richly colored, highly contrasted coat of spots or marbling Characteristics Active, playful, intelligent 14. Russian Blue Getty Creative A beautiful silver-blue coat and vibrant green eyes make the Russian blue cat stand out among shorthaired breeds. The Russian blue is also intelligent, playful and gentle. You can often find them perched near their owners and affectionate with those they love. Its short, silky coat doesn’t shed too much and can be maintained with just occasional brushing. The medium-sized vocal, observant and sticklers to routine. They also do well with children or other pets as long as they have plenty of opportunities for mental stimulation. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 10-14 pounds Height 8-10 inches Life Expectancy 10-20+ years Coat and Color Short, blue and silver coat Characteristics Intelligent, affectionate, talkative 15. Norwegian Forest Cat Getty Creative The large, semi-long-haired Norwegian forest cat has a waterproof double coat made with coarse guard hairs with a dense undercoat designed for cold Scandinavian winters. Their coats can come in any color but often feature a tabby brown-and-white fur. They have large, almond-shaped eyes and a triangle-shaped head. This breed is active and requires scratching posts and toys to keep their attention. They are also adaptable and social when they want to be. Although they are a gentle, calm breed, they are not considered “lap cats.” Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 8-18 pounds Height 9-12 inches Life Expectancy 13+ years Coat and Color Semi-long-haired waterproof double coat that comes in all colors Characteristics A rugged-looking coat designed for cold Scandinavian winters, almond-shaped eyes, calm demeanor 16. Oriental Shorthair Getty Creative Elegant, with long legs and flared ears, the oriental shorthair cat has a short coat that comes in many colors, including a tabby and tortoiseshell. Part of the Siamese breed group, the oriental shorthair is playful, often nudging you or sitting on your lap. This cat is curious and intelligent, known to explore their homes and entertain themselves. Oriental shorthairs are active and receptive to training. They demand a lot of attention, and are known to be destructive in the house when left alone for extended periods of time. Grooming their fine coat is easy, requiring a good combing every week or two. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 5-12 pounds Height 8-10 inches Life Expectancy 10-20 years Coat and Color Short coat in a wide array of colors including traditional solid, tabby, tortie and torbie Characteristics Large ears, almond-shaped eyes, long legs, elegant stature 17. Siamese Getty Creative The Siamese is one of the most easily recognizable cat breeds known for their light, silky coats with dark legs, tail, and facial area. They have deep blue, almond-shaped eyes and prominent ears. The Siamese have intelligent, curious personalities and are social cats known for talking with a distinct voice. This is a cat that will enjoy being with you at all times. They require mental stimulation like puzzles and games to stay happy. Grooming a Siamese is easy with a brush once a week. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 5-12 pounds Height 8-10 inches Life Expectancy 10-20 years Coat and Color Light colored coat with darker extremities and facial area known as “seal point” pattern; points can also come in chocolate, blue, lilac, cinnamon, fawn, red and cream Characteristics Medium-sized, shorthair cat with a distinct coat coloring and deep blue eyes; social and intelligent 18. Cornish Rex Getty Creative The Cornish rex has a super soft, curly coat, with large, expressive ears. This is an active breed that enjoys playing fetch, tossing objects and having fun with their humans. This is a sturdy breed with an egg-shaped head with high cheekbones and a Roman nose in sharp contrast to its small waist and long legs. They have a high activity level and a love of attention, but their independent spirit means they can always find a way to entertain themselves. The Cornish rex is low-maintenance when it comes to grooming and too much grooming can actually hurt their soft coat. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 6-9 pounds Height 12-14 inches Life Expectancy 9-13 years Coat and Color Soft, curly coat that comes in many different colors Characteristics Egg-shaped head, expressive ears, curly coat, friendly personality 19. Selkirk Rex Getty Creative The Selkirk rex is a naturally curly breed with plush, loose curls that can be either short- or long-haired. This breed has a round head and large eyes. The Selkirk rex is social and enjoys spending time with humans, including kids, and other animals. Although their coats are often messy, they only require combing once or twice a week to maintain. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 9-11 inches Height 7-12 inches Life Expectancy 10-15 years Coat and Color Short- and long-haired curly coat in many different colors Characteristics Extremely curly coat, easy-going and relaxed 20. Birman Getty Creative Birmans are beautiful, with striking blue eyes, a round face, and white paws. The breed is born all white and develops color when it is older, which could be seal, blue, lilac, chocolate, red, cream or tortie. The Birman cat is known for being gentle, affectionate, and friendly. They have soft, chirping voices and a patient temperament that works well with children and other pets. Birmans are easy and low-maintenance, only requiring minimal grooming to keep their single coat shiny and healthy. This breed is considered a lap cat, as they love sitting in your arms and following you around the house. Weight/Size 9-20 pounds Weight/Size 6-14 inches Height 8-11 inches Life Expectancy 9-15 years Coat and Color Born white, then turns seal, blue, lilac, chocolate, red, cream and tortie with white paws Characteristics Striking blue eyes, white paws and a gentle demeanor Was this article helpful? Share your feedback Send feedback to the editorial team Rate this Article ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ Please rate the article Email Please enter valid email address Comments We'd love to hear from you, please enter your comments. Invalid email address Submit Thank You for your feedback! Something went wrong. Please try again later. Recommended Reading Best Pet Insurance Best Cheap Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Wellness Plans For Routine Care Best Pet Insurance For Older Dogs Best Pet Insurance For French Bulldogs Compare Pet Insurance Quotes Best Pet Insurance In Your State Pet Insurance Arizona (AZ) Pet Insurance California (CA) Pet Insurance Florida (FL) Pet Insurance Indiana (IN) Pet Insurance Massachusetts (MA) Pet Insurance New Jersey (NJ) Pet Insurance New York (NY) Pet Insurance Texas (TX) Pet Insurance Utah (UT) Pet Insurance Wisconsin (WI) Our Guides What Does Pet Insurance Cover? How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? How Does Pet Insurance Work? Pet Dental Insurance Explained How To Make A Pet Insurance Claim What Is a Pet Insurance Deductible? What is Pet Insurance Waiting Periods? Does Pet Insurance Cover Spaying and Neutering? What Pet Insurance Covers Cancer Treatment? Pet Insurance That Pays The Vet Directly Exotic Pet Insurance Life Insurance For Pets More In Pet Insurance Read This Next Most Expensive Dog Breeds For Pet Insurance Pet Insurance For Pre-Existing Conditions Pet Insurance for Multi Pets Dog Breed Quiz: What Dog Should I Get? Next Up In Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Best Cheap Pet Insurance How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? What Does Pet Insurance Cover? Is Pet Insurance Worth It? Compare Pet Insurance Quotes More from Tramadol For Dogs: Safe Dosages And Uses By Meera Pal Contributor How Long Are Cats Pregnant? By Patricia Louis Editor Bordetella Vaccine For Kennel Cough In Dogs By Patricia Louis Editor Parvo In Dogs: Symptoms And Treatments By Jean Marie Bauhaus Contributor 20 Most Popular Dog Breeds (2023) By Aaliyah Pasols Contributor Human Years To Dog Years Calculator By Meera Pal Contributor Information provided on Forbes Advisor is for educational purposes only. Your financial situation is unique and the products and services we review may not be right for your circumstances. We do not offer financial advice, advisory or brokerage services, nor do we recommend or advise individuals or to buy or sell particular stocks or securities. Performance information may have changed since the time of publication. Past performance is not indicative of future results. Forbes Advisor adheres to strict editorial integrity standards. To the best of our knowledge, all content is accurate as of the date posted, though offers contained herein may no longer be available. The opinions expressed are the author’s alone and have not been provided, approved, or otherwise endorsed by our partners. Sydni Ellis Contributor Sydni Ellis is a freelance writer whose work has appeared in HuffPost, Motherly, Romper, SheKnows, POPSUGAR, and other publications focused on lifestyle, entertainment, parenting, and wellness. She has a Master of Journalism from the University of North Texas and a Best Mama award from her three little boys (at least, that’s what she thinks the scribbled words on the card say). When she isn’t busy singing along to Disney movies and catching her husband up on the latest celebrity gossip, she can almost always be found with a good book and an iced coffee in hand. © 2023 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved. AdChoices AdChoices Privacy Statement Terms and Conditions About Us Contact Us Careers Coupons Newsroom Forbes Quote of the Day Advertise lorem Are you sure you want to rest your choices? cancel ok The Forbes Advisor editorial team is independent and objective. To help support our reporting work, and to continue our ability to provide this content for free to our readers, we receive compensation from the companies that advertise on the Forbes Advisor site. This compensation comes from two main sources. First, we provide paid placements to advertisers to present their offers. The compensation we receive for those placements affects how and where advertisers’ offers appear on the site. This site does not include all companies or products available within the market. Second, we also include links to advertisers’ offers in some of our articles; these “affiliate links” may generate income for our site when you click on them. The compensation we receive from advertisers does not influence the recommendations or advice our editorial team provides in our articles or otherwise impact any of the editorial content on Forbes Advisor. While we work hard to provide accurate and up to date information that we think you will find relevant, Forbes Advisor does not and cannot guarantee that any information provided is complete and makes no representations or warranties in connection thereto, nor to the accuracy or applicability thereof. Here is a list of our partners who offer products that we have affiliate links for. 

School & BoardsCollege AdmissionGovt Jobs Alert & PrepExamsCurrent AffairsGeneral KnowledgeCareersVideosEducation NewsQuiz & Mock TestsEbooksResultsहिन्दीJagran TV Jagran PlayView All Categories School Colleges GK SRM University Jobs Exams Results Current Affairs JEE MBA News Mock Test Career Counselling हिन्दी CBSE Web Stories Home GENERAL KNOWLEDGE General Knowledge Lists Top 10 Cat Breeds in the World Who doesn’t love cats? These adorable and fluffy creatures are some of the most sought-out pets in the world. Here is a list of some of the top 10 cat breeds in the world. Saumya Updated: Sep 21, 2023 16:13 IST List Of Top 10 Cat Breeds Cats are, undoubtedly, one of the most adorable and lovable creatures on the planet. These cute little animals are graceful, silly, and funny, which makes us love them even more. After looking at them, it is no wonder that ancient Egyptians used to worship them. Unsurprisingly, Cats are the 2nd most popular pet in the world. At least 23% of the world's population owns them. So, to fulfil every cat lover's dream, we have come up with a list (and some adorable pictures) of the top 10 cat breeds in the world. Whether you're looking for a cuddly companion or a playful pet, there's a cat breed out there that's perfect for you. Also See | The 7 Big Cats | Explained Top Cat Breeds in the World Breed Differentiator 1. Ragdoll Large domesticated cats 2. Maine Coon Large domesticated cats 3. British Shorthair Medium-sized cats 4. Scottish Fold Medium-sized cats 5. Sphynx Medium-sized cats 6. Siamese Small-to-medium sized cats 7. Persian Medium-sized cats 8. Bengal Medium-sized cats 9. Burmese Small-to-medium sized cats 10. Russian Blue Medium-sized cats Top 10 Cat Breeds 10. Russian Blue Cat Source: Daily Paws The Russian Blue cat is a breed of domestic cat with a distinctive blue-grey coat. They are known for their intelligence, affectionate nature, and playful personalities. Generally considered to be a healthy and hardy breed, they have a lifespan of around 15 years. 9. Burmese Cat Source: Daily Paws The Burmese cats are a breed of domestic cat that originated in Southeast Asia and was developed in the United States in the 1930s. They are known for their short, shiny, and close-lying coat that comes in a variety of colours, including sable, brown, blue, and champagne. Burmese cats make for a great companion as they are very affectionate, friendly, sociable, and great with children. 8. Bengal Cat Source: Daily Paws The Bengal cat is a breed of domestic cat that was created by breeding an Asian leopard cat with a domestic cat. They are known for their unique and exotic appearance, with a coat that is covered in spots, marbled patterns, or rosettes. They are one of the smartest cat breeds and are sometimes said to exhibit 'dog-like' behaviour. 7. Persian Cat Source: Paws India The Persian cat is a long-haired breed of cat characterized by its round face and shortened muzzle. They have calm and docile personalities, making them a popular choice as household pets. They are one of the fluffiest cat breeds and require regular grooming to maintain their long, thick fur. 6. Siamese Cat Source: Crazy About Cats The Siamese cat is a breed of domestic cat that originated in Thailand, also known as Siam. They are known for their distinctive colouring, with a pale body and darker points on the face, ears, paws, and tail. Siamese cats are known to be very vocal and may become quite "chatty" with their owners. They are also highly intelligent and can be trained to perform tricks and walk on a leash. Also Read | Differences between Cheetah, Leopard, Lion & Tiger 5. Sphynx Cat Source: Daily Paws The Sphynx cat is a breed of cat known for its hairless appearance. They are affectionate and sociable animals that make good pets. They are also known for their intelligence and playfulness. They are a rare breed that requires regular grooming to maintain the health of their furless skin. 4. Scottish Fold Cat Source: Holidaysmart The Scottish Fold cat is a domestic cat breed that is known for its unique folded ears, which give them a distinctive "owl-like" appearance. They have a medium-to-large body and a round head. Known for being affectionate, intelligent, and adaptable cats that make great companions. They are also known for being good with children and other pets. 3. British Shorthair Cat Source: Pixabay The British Shorthair cat is a popular domestic cat breed that is known for its round face, chubby cheeks, and stocky build. They have a dense, soft, and plush coat that comes in a variety of colours. They are one of the oldest recognized cat breeds. 2. Maine Coon Cat Source: ElleVet The Maine Coon cat is a large, domesticated cat breed that is known for its distinctive physical appearance, including its long, shaggy coat, bushy tail, and large size. They are one of the oldest natural cat breeds in North America and are known to be very friendly and loving with people. They have playful and outgoing personalities and are known to be very social and affectionate towards their human family, hence they are often described as "gentle giants". 1. Ragdoll Cat Source: The Spruce Pets The Ragdoll cat is a breed of domestic cat known for its large size and docile, relaxed temperament. They are characterized by their blue eyes, long silky coats, and a tendency to "flop" or go limp when picked up, which is where the breed gets its name "Ragdoll." The breed was developed in the 1960s by breeder Ann Baker, who started breeding a feral cat with Siamese and Birman cats. They are a good choice for families with children and other pets, as they are known to be very tolerant and good-natured. Related In Top 10 | Top 10 Richest Actors In The World FAQ What are the rarest cat breeds? The Sphynx cat is one of the rarest cat breeds in the world. What are the 3 most common cat breeds? Ragdoll, Maine Coon, and British Shorthair are the top cat breeds in the world. What is the number 1 breed of cat? Ragdoll is the number one cat breed in the world. Get the latest General Knowledge and Current Affairs from all over India and world for all competitive exams. खेलें हर किस्म के रोमांच से भरपूर गेम्स सिर्फ़ जागरण प्ले पर अभी खेलें Related Categories All Top 10 Lists Next Trending World Cup 2023 Points Table Highest Team Score in World Cup October Important Days Asian Games 2023 India Medals Latest Education News Asian Games 2023: एशियन गेम्स के इतिहास में भारत ने कब कितने स्वर्ण पदक जीते है?2 hrs ago भारत ने रचा इतिहास, पहली बार किसी Asian Games में जीते 100 से अधिक पदक, यहां देखें पूरी मेडल लिस्ट 2 hrs ago Top 10 Weekly Current Affairs in Hindi: 01 अक्टूबर से 07 अक्टूबर 20232 hrs ago ICC World Cup points Table 2023: अपडेटेड पॉइंट्स टेबल यहां देखें 3 hrs ago [Updated] ICC World Cup 2023 Points Table: Team Standings and Ranking3 hrs ago SSC CPO Paper 1 Answer Key 2023 Released on ssc.digialm.com: Download Response Sheet, Submit Objection4 hrs ago इंडिया पोस्ट जीडीएस 3rd मेरिट लिस्ट 2023: indiapostgdsonline.gov.in पर होगी रिलीज, ऐसे कर सकेंगे चेक5 hrs ago SSC CPO Expected Cut Off 2023: Tier 1 Category-wise Minimum Qualifying Marks5 hrs ago Fastest Century In ICC ODI Cricket World Cup History (1975 - 2023)5 hrs ago RBI Assistant Exam Date 2023 OUT: आरबीआई असिस्टेंट भर्ती परीक्षा टली, अब इस दिन होगा प्री और मेन्स एग्जाम5 hrs ago Prove yourself by finding 12 differences between the fox eating snacks pictures in 30 seconds.6 hrs ago SSC CPO Answer Key 2023 OUT: एसएससी सीपीओ परीक्षा की उत्तर कुंजी ssc.nic.in पर जारी, यहाँ से डाउनलोड करें पीडीएफ6 hrs ago You have the eyes of a hunter if you can spot the fish in the picture in 10 seconds!6 hrs ago ICC ODI World Cup इतिहास में सबसे तेज़ शतक लगाने वाले खिलाड़ी कौन है? 7 hrs ago Highest Team Scores of All Time in the ICC Cricket World Cup7 hrs ago SSC CPO 2023 Answer Key Release Date, Tier 1 Response Sheet PDF Link Soon7 hrs ago Optical Illusion to Test Your Vision: Find the iguana in the garden in 7 seconds!7 hrs ago You are a high IQ genius if you can find the missing number in 8 seconds!7 hrs ago QUICK LINKS About Us Register Contact us Advertise with Us Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions This website follows the DNPA's code of conduct For any feedback or complaint, email to: compliant_gro@jagrannewmedia.com Jagran Prakashan Ltd @ 2023 This website uses cookie or similar technologies, to enhance your browsing experience and provide personalised recommendations. By continuing to use our website, you agree to our Privacy Policy and Cookie Policy. Accept Just Now Asian Games 2023: एशियन गेम्स के इतिहास में भारत ने कब कितने स्वर्ण पदक जीते है?2 hrs ago भारत ने रचा इतिहास, पहली बार किसी Asian Games में जीते 100 से अधिक पदक, यहां देखें पूरी मेडल लिस्ट 2 hrs ago Top 10 Weekly Current Affairs in Hindi: 01 अक्टूबर से 07 अक्टूबर 20232 hrs ago ICC World Cup points Table 2023: अपडेटेड पॉइंट्स टेबल यहां देखें 3 hrs ago [Updated] ICC World Cup 2023 Points Table: Team Standings and Ranking3 hrs ago SSC CPO Paper 1 Answer Key 2023 Released on ssc.digialm.com: Download Response Sheet, Submit Objection4 hrs ago इंडिया पोस्ट जीडीएस 3rd मेरिट लिस्ट 2023: indiapostgdsonline.gov.in पर होगी रिलीज, ऐसे कर सकेंगे चेक5 hrs ago SSC CPO Expected Cut Off 2023: Tier 1 Category-wise Minimum Qualifying Marks5 hrs ago Fastest Century In ICC ODI Cricket World Cup History (1975 - 2023)5 hrs ago RBI Assistant Exam Date 2023 OUT: आरबीआई असिस्टेंट भर्ती परीक्षा टली, अब इस दिन होगा प्री और मेन्स एग्जाम5 hrs ago Prove yourself by finding 12 differences between the fox eating snacks pictures in 30 seconds.6 hrs ago SSC CPO Answer Key 2023 OUT: एसएससी सीपीओ परीक्षा की उत्तर कुंजी ssc.nic.in पर जारी, यहाँ से डाउनलोड करें पीडीएफ6 hrs ago You have the eyes of a hunter if you can spot the fish in the picture in 10 seconds!6 hrs ago ICC ODI World Cup इतिहास में सबसे तेज़ शतक लगाने वाले खिलाड़ी कौन है? 7 hrs ago Highest Team Scores of All Time in the ICC Cricket World Cup7 hrs ago SSC CPO 2023 Answer Key Release Date, Tier 1 Response Sheet PDF Link Soon7 hrs ago Optical Illusion to Test Your Vision: Find the iguana in the garden in 7 seconds!7 hrs ago You are a high IQ genius if you can find the missing number in 8 seconds!7 hrs ago JEE Advanced 2024 Study Plan and Effective Preparation Strategy 8 hrs ago JEE Advanced Exam Pattern and Marking Scheme 2024: Download PDF8 hrs ago Result Updates UK Board 12th Result 2023 - Scrutiny ResultSep 8, 2023 UK Board Result 2023 - Scrutiny ResultSep 8, 2023 UK Board 10th Result 2023 - Scrutiny ResultSep 1, 2023 NIOS Board 10th Result 2023 - DeclaredJun 26, 2023 For more results, click here Home Web Stories Mock Tests Trending Results 

Skip to content Pet blog Shop Open main menu Cats Cat Breeds Complete index of all the wonderful cat breeds and mixes Cat Nutrition Deciding what you can and cannot feed your furry friend is a crucial decision Cat Gear We love our cats, and therefore we want to get them the best gear Cat Behaviour Understanding cat behavior can set you both up for a happy, productive relationship Dogs Dog Breeds Complete index of all the wonderful dog breeds and mixes Dog Nutrition Deciding what you can and cannot feed your four legged friend is a crucial decision Dog Gear We love our dogs, and therefore we want to get them the best gear Dog Training Training your dog can set you both up for a happy, productive relationship Search Food Recalls Dog food recalls The most complete list of dog food recalls Cat food recalls The most complete list of cat food recalls Ask a Vet Close panel Cats Cat Breeds Complete index of all the wonderful cat breeds and mixes Cat Nutrition Deciding what you can and cannot feed your furry friend is a crucial decision Cat Gear We love our cats, and therefore we want to get them the best gear Cat Behaviour Understanding cat behavior can set you both up for a happy, productive relationship Dogs Dog Breeds Complete index of all the wonderful dog breeds and mixes Dog Nutrition Deciding what you can and cannot feed your four legged friend is a crucial decision Dog Gear We love our dogs, and therefore we want to get them the best gear Dog Training Training your dog can set you both up for a happy, productive relationship Hepper is reader-supported. When you buy via links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission at no cost to you. Learn more. 10 Most Popular Cat Breeds in 2023 (With Pictures) By Nicole Cosgrove Updated on Sep 13, 2023 Share The cat is one of the most popular pets across the world. A recent survey shows that more than 25% of households in the United States have at least one. Cats come in various breeds, and each species is unique. You may be surprised how different their temperaments, grooming requirements, and health issues are. If you plan to have a cat in your home or add a new feline ally, the following are the most popular cat breeds this year. The 10 Most Popular Cat Breeds in the World 1. Persian Cat Image Credit: ANURAK PONTPATIMET, Shutterstock Persian cats are well-known among many cat fanciers and have been around for an extended period. They are beautiful, easy-going, affectionate, and calm, making them the best companion pets. They have round heads, chubby cheeks, short snouts, fluffy hair, and sturdy bodies. Their coats have various stunning colors and patterns. Persians are medium-sized cats and weigh between 7 and 12 pounds. They are ideal for people who want laidback kitties. 2. Ragdoll Cat Image Credit: Carolyn R, Shutterstock The Ragdoll is the second largest domesticated cat in the world, next to the Maine Coon. They tend to flop like a ragdoll when you cradle them in your arms. They are mostly called “puppy-cats” due to their dog-like temperament. Ragdolls have long coats with different bright colors, and their eyes are deep and captivating, which makes many people love them. They grow bigger and weigh between 10 and 20 pounds. They are incredibly affectionate, mild-mannered, and loving. The cats always like human companionship and follow their owners around the house. Ragdolls get along well with other pets and children, and they like snuggling on the sofa or bed with you or your loved ones. Teaching them tricks such as begging, rolling over, or playing fetch is easy. 3. Exotic Shorthair Cat Image Credit: Ewa Studio, Shutterstock Exotic Shorthair cats have all the characteristics of Persian cats but have different coats. Exotics have small, thick, and dense coats, making them a perfect choice for people who don’t have time for daily grooming but love the Persian personality. Their coats are elegant and vary in shades and patterns. They have a round head, round eyes, and round bodies. Exotic Shorthairs are known to be playful, loyal, and affectionate compared to other feline breeds. They will follow you anywhere you go in your home. 4. Abyssinian Cats Image Credit: Ingus Kruklitis, Shutterstock The Abyssinian is one of the most intelligent and oldest cat breeds in the world. They are clever and curious and can get into trouble while exploring their surroundings. They have naturally beautiful coats, long, slender legs, wedge-shaped heads, and half-cupped ears. Abyssinians are easy to care for and mingle well with other animals, cats, and children. They are affectionate, loyal, and love being around people. Abyssinian cats are very playful and will impress you with their acrobatics since they love jumping and climbing. They also like to play with toys and have soft voices. 5. Maine Coon Cat Image Credit: Daniel Zopf, Unsplash Maine Coons are the largest domestic cats and are commonly referred to as “gentle giants.” They stand out from other breeds because they grow up to 40 inches. Many people are surprised by their size since they can weigh even more than 30 pounds. They have sturdy bodies full of muscles. They have a rugged appearance and shaggy coats, and they are the most affectionate and friendliest of all cat breeds. If you want a playful and loving cat, the Maine Coon is a perfect choice. They are also independent and devoted to their owners and love to stay where you are or where they see you. 6. Sphynx Cat Image Credit: Lightspruch, Shutterstock The Sphynx is one of the newest and rarest cat breeds. Recently, their demand has risen in the United States and has continued to grow. These cats have a unique look that pleases many fanciers. They have thin layers of downy fuzz that cover their bodies, though they appear as if they are hairless. In addition, they have big eyes and ears. They are social, love attention, and like to be at your side at all times. They are also playful and energetic. The Sphynx are not outdoor cats, but that doesn’t mean they cannot go outside. Since they have exposed skin, you must protect them from the sun and harsh elements. 7. Devon Rex Cat Image Credit: Oleksandr Volchanskyi, Shutterstock These cats look like aliens, elves, or bats. They have more characteristics of a dog than of a cat. They have a unique, winsome appearance that you will always love to watch. Their intelligence is above average, and they can easily learn advanced tricks and commands. They love interacting with people, kids, and other pets. Devon Rexes are playful and love playing with toys for mental stimulation. They crave attention and don’t like being left alone for long. 8. American Shorthair Cat Image Credit: Oleksandr Volchanskyi, Shutterstock The American Shorthair is one of the devoted cat breeds to their owners. They are popularly known for their protection against rats and other pests. They have a gentle nature with kids, making them ideal for working families with children. They are also suitable for households with other pets since they get along well with other animals. American Shorthairs are medium-sized cats with muscular bodies. They have square-shaped jaws and thick legs. If you are looking for an affectionate, loyal, and endearing cat, the American Shorthair is an ideal choice. 9. Scottish Fold Cats Image Credit: mdmmikle, Shutterstock Scottish Fold cats are easy-going, loving, and friendly to people and other pets. They are also calm and quiet creatures. They have round and folded eyes, making them look owl-like. They are playful, outgoing, and likely to be attached to one family member. The cats produce soft voices and “speak” in various meows and purrs, which is unique compared to other breeds. See also: Cat Breeds Encyclopedia Is Now a Part of Hepper 10. British Shorthair Cat Image Credit: Nynke van Holten, Shutterstodck British Shorthairs are the most peaceful feline breeds in the world. They are medium-sized cats with a thick and chunky appearance. They have round eyes, thick muscles, heavy bones, and dense fur. British Shorthairs are incredibly loyal and devoted to their owners. However, they are exceedingly patient and have no problem being left alone since they keep themselves busy playing. They spend most of their time lounging for relaxation and enjoyment. Though a popular and excellent breed, they are costly, making them unobtainable to many. See also: British Shorthair vs Ragdoll Cats: The Differences (With Pictures) Conclusion There are so many cat breeds, but the cats we discussed are the most popular cat breeds this year. Whether you’re a first-time owner or feline enthusiast, you’re sure to find a friendly cat you can give a forever home. If you want to bring a feline friend home, go through the list and determine which remarkable cat is the most appropriate breed for you. See Also: 15 Most Independent Cat Breeds (With Pictures) Featured Image Credit: izmargad, Shutterstock ContentsThe 10 Most Popular Cat Breeds in the World1. Persian Cat2. Ragdoll Cat3. Exotic Shorthair Cat4. Abyssinian Cats5. Maine Coon Cat6. Sphynx Cat7. Devon Rex Cat8. American Shorthair Cat9. Scottish Fold Cats10. British Shorthair CatConclusion Authored by Nicole Cosgrove Nicole is a lover of animals of all sizes but is especially fascinated with the feline variety. She’s the proud mom of Baby, a Burmese, and works every day so he can relax in the sunshine or by the fire. She’s always had a cat in her home and has spent countless days with others, observing behaviors and softening up even the grouchiest of the lot. Nicole wants to share her kitty expertise with you so you and your cat can live happy, healthy, and care-free....Read more Advertisement Trending Posts 4 Homemade Grain-Free Cat Treat Recipes (Vet Approved) Why Do Cats Always Land on Their Feet? Science-Based Facts & FAQ How to Keep Cats Out of Flower Beds: 11 Easy Methods Are Maine Coon Cats Hypoallergenic? Vet-Approved Allergy Facts & Prevention Tips Related Articles Further Reading Is Great Wolf Lodge Pet Friendly? 2023 Policy & Requirements By Rachel Sep 6, 2023 - 3 min read Will a Cat Keep Bugs Away? The Surprising Answer! By Nicole Feb 2, 2023 - 4 min read 10 Best Cat Grass Seeds & Kits – 2023 Reviews & Guide By Nicole Sep 20, 2023 - 12 min read Vet Articles Latest Vet Answers The latest veterinarians' answers to questions from our database Can a Dog Take Metronidazole Without Food? Answered by Dr. Kim Podlecki, DVM (Vet) Beagle Pain Syndrome: Causes, Signs & Care Guide Answered by Dr. Rachel Ellison What Size Tank Should I Use for 2 Goldfish? Our Vet Answers Answered by Dr. Luqman Javed, DVM (Vet) Why Does My Cat Hide? 3 Likely Reasons Answered by Dr. Lindsay Bisset, BVSc (Vet) How to Check a Dog’s Heart Rate: Our Vet’s Tips, Tricks, & Guide Answered by Dr. Luqman Javed, DVM (Vet) Dog Stung by a Scorpion? Our Vet Explains What to Do Answered by Dr. Maria Zayas Cat food recalls Have a cat? Stay on top of cat food recalls here > Dog food recalls Have a dog? Stay on top of dog food recalls here > Ask a vet Have a question? talk to a vet online for advice > #HepperOfficial Hepper.com does not intend to provide veterinary advice. While we provide information resources and canine education, the content here is not a substitute for veterinary guidance. Update Privacy Preferences Search Dogs Dog Food Recalls Dog Breeds Dog Nutrition Dog Gear Dog Training Cats Cat Food Recalls Cat Breeds Cat Nutrition Cat Gear Cat Behaviour General Ask a Vet About Us Contact Terms of Service Privacy Policy © All Rights Reserved Hepper. 2023 

Skip to main content Menu Search Getting StartedGetting StartedSee AllBreed SelectorPets 101Health & WellnessTraining & ServicesInsurance & SubscriptionsDogsDogsSee AllLearning & TrainingDog GearStagesHousing & CratingDog Mealtime & TreatsCatsCatsSee AllCat GearCat BehaviorLitterSleepCat Mealtime & TreatsOther AnimalsOther AnimalsSee AllSmall PetsAquariumReptilesBirdsShopShopSee AllFoodHomeClinicToysEssentialsGroomingTreats & GiftsOther Home Cats These are the 10 most popular cat breeds, as counted by The Cat Fanciers’ Association Here are the top 10 most popular cat breeds in the world By Gabrielle LaFrank April 22, 2023 Share Image used with permission by copyright holder The Cat Fanciers’ Association (CFA) recognizes 46 different feline breeds, but not all of them can be the most popular. That’s why the CFA took a look into its registries to determine the top 10 most popular cat breeds of 2022. It welcomes registrations from “nonstandard” and “non-pedigreed” cats as well, but those feline friends weren’t included in this particular count. Contents 10. The Siberian cat9. The Sphynx cat8. The Scottish fold cat7. The Abyssinian cat6. The British shorthair cat5. The Persian cat4. The Exotic shorthair cat3. The Devon Rex cat2. The Maine Coon cat1. The Ragdoll catShow 6 more items Which types of cats do you think were the most popular in 2022? Whether you can list off every breed or can’t even name one, we guarantee there’s at least one surprise on this list. Recommended Videos Read on to discover the most popular cat breeds, as determined by the CFA. Image used with permission by copyright holder 10. The Siberian cat As their name suggests, Siberian cats hail from the cold Russian tundra, though they have been found in the U.S. as early as 1990. They’ve slowly climbed the ranks of popularity since then, and 2022 marked the first time they’ve made the top 10 list. These cats, which are medium to large pets, can be equally athletic and affectionate, says Purina, though individual personalities will vary, of course. Odds are, though, you’ll be getting a wonderfully adaptable feline friend. Image used with permission by copyright holder 9. The Sphynx cat These hairless cats are famous for their nude look, but did you know their famous features were the result of a naturally occurring genetic mutation? It’s true — CFA explains that “years of careful outcrossing to normal-coated cats and back to hairless cats have produced healthy, outgoing cats who adapt easily to wearing clothes and costumes,” though you’ll love this breed’s sense of humor just as much as its unique look. But remember — hairless cats require more frequent bathing, so make sure you can take on this responsibility before adopting a Sphynx. Image used with permission by copyright holder 8. The Scottish fold cat Scottish fold cats are another breed with unique characteristics — particularly their folded ears and wide eyes. Don’t let their startled expression fool you, though! Purina explains that Scottish fold cats are quiet and sweet, however, they’ll be equally at home in a loud and busy household with lots of people. They can even be wonderful pets for first-time cat owners. Image used with permission by copyright holder 7. The Abyssinian cat You might have guessed it from their name alone, but Abyssinian cats are an ancient breed. There’s evidence that they existed in Egypt over 4,000 years ago, though they remain popular even today (via VCA Hospitals). The “Abys” are curious, inquisitive cats that are more active than other breeds. You’ll need to keep these kitties entertained throughout the day if you’re not into the idea of them finding their own entertainment, which — believe us — they will. Image used with permission by copyright holder 6. The British shorthair cat These cats used to be known as the “British Blue,” explains the CFA, but they now are recognized in a wide variety of colors. Their dense coat is just one detail about this hearty breed that makes them excellent barn cats, though most Brits now enjoy a semi-independent life in the warmth of a family home. One thing is certain about these cats – they are wonderfully, fiercely loyal! Image used with permission by copyright holder 5. The Persian cat Persian cats are famous for their elegant appearance and long coats, but there’s so much about this breed to love. In fact, the CFA recognizes seven distinct competitive divisions for Persians, since they are by far the most popular show cat. They’re also popular pets, as they tend to have well-rounded personalities. Most Persians are laid back and loyal, though they’ll seek someone out when they’re ready for attention or play. Related Does your cat bump heads with you? This is what your pet is really trying to tell you Forget the litter box: This cat was trained to use the toilet Why do cats bite and chew on their nails? What to do if it happens 4. The Exotic shorthair cat Exotic shorthair cats were bred to be a relative of the Persian that’s easier to care for. Unsurprisingly, the shorter coat makes daily tasks like grooming less time consuming, but these cats still need daily care to stay at the top of their game. Exotic kitties tend to be livelier than their Persian cousins, notes Purina, but can be aloof with people they don’t know. They won’t demand constant attention, either, so they could be a great match for families looking for more independent pets. Image used with permission by copyright holder 3. The Devon Rex cat Devon Rex cats — CFA’s most popular short-haired cat breed — are another distinctly unique breed, especially when one notices their pointy, “butterfly ears.” Their coats are so short and fragile that they require no brushing at all. In fact, their fur and whiskers can occasionally break from the slightest touch! Purina notes that Devon Rex cats are social and playful, and they’ll love to have spaces where they can climb and explore. They’ll likely seek out affection when playtime is over, so you’ll get the best of both worlds with this breed. Image used with permission by copyright holder 2. The Maine Coon cat This cat breed holds second place for yet another year, and no one is complaining one bit. Maine Coon cats originated in the U.S. around the time of the Civil War, and they’re the largest recognized cat breed, as well. Let’s put it this way — they’re the “gentle giants” of the cat world! Maine Coon felines may need frequent grooming and lots of exercise space, but they’ll thank you with lots of love. Image used with permission by copyright holder 1. The Ragdoll cat This breed takes the crown as the CFA’s most popular cat for the fourth year in a row. It’s a newer addition to the CFA lineup, though, as it’s only been recognized as a breed since 1998. They were selectively bred as early as the 1960s, though, and have quickly become one of the more well-known feline breeds throughout the world. Whether it’s the Ragdoll’s mellow personality or gentle looks that make it so popular, one thing is for sure — this cat’s blue eyes are stunning! So, were you surprised by any of the cat breeds on this list? Some definitely deserved their high-ranking spots, but we were excited to see a few underdogs — or should we say, undercats — on this list as well. It was a great way to learn a bit more about the world’s most popular cat breeds! Editors' Recommendations 8 autumn Instagram pet photographs that will get you excited for the gorgeous season ahead Why is my cat aggressive all of a sudden? We have answers How you can communicate with your cat by blinking slowly Why do cats twitch in their sleep? The real reasons behind this curious behavior This video of cats playing volleyball together is adorable until it all goes wrong Topics Getting Started Cat Behavior Pets 101 Gabrielle LaFrank Contributor twitter Email Gabrielle LaFrank has written for sites such as Psych2Go, Elite Daily, and, currently, PawTracks. When she's not writing, you… Cats Wondering why cats chirp? Fascinating reasons why your cat chirps at birds (and you) Cat chirping: What it is and the reasons behind this cute sound If bird-watching is your cat's idea of a good time, it's possible you've heard him chirping. Tail swishing, eyes wide and trained on his potential prey, a series of strangely adorable sounds emits from your furry companion. Chirping, also known as chattering, sounds nothing like your cat's usual meow. But don't be alarmed if you've never heard your cat chirp before. While some frisky felines are chatterboxes, others are silent and stealthy. So, what's the cause of this unusual sound? Why do cats chirp? And more importantly, what do these unusual noises mean? Read more Cats How to help cats inside car engines … before it’s too late Use these tricks to prevent your cat from getting into a car engine Overdrive was only a 2-month-old kitten when he hid inside the engine compartment of a car parked at a rest stop in Arizona. The unsuspecting tourists who owned the car were alarmed when 200 miles later, they stopped at a restaurant in Utah and heard desperate meows coming from under the hood of their car. The tiny buff-colored tabby was successfully rescued and taken to the nearby Best Friends Animal Sanctuary. Although traumatized by the experience, he miraculously didn’t sustain any injuries. He's just one of numerous cats in car engines that have survived. Every year, there are stories of cats getting trapped in vehicle engine compartments. Once a car engine starts, things can quickly take a turn for the worse for a cat hiding under the hood, say veterinary experts at the Chastain Veterinary Medical Group in Texas. The sudden vibration and roar of the car’s engine can cause a stowaway cat to jump or fall into the fan or fan belt and pulleys. The results are often disastrous for the cat, causing trauma, lacerations, and on occasion, death. Read more Cats How to cat-proof your balcony before the unthinkable happens Tips to keep your kitty safe while on the balcony It's tempting to spend some time outside with your cat whenever the weather is nice, and taking your cat outside can give him a nice break from indoor-only life. If you love to spend time on your balcony, it's natural to consider letting your cat join you, but balconies can be dangerous for cats. In addition to the potential for a fall, balconies have several other risks that you might not be aware of. Understanding how to cat-proof a balcony can help you to make the space safer, so you and your cat can spend a little time outside together. Will a cat jump off a balcony? Balconies can be very dangerous for cats because of the possibility of "high-rise syndrome." Always Compassionate Veterinary Care explains that high-rise syndrome refers to the occurrence of cats falling out of high-rise buildings and needing veterinary treatment. The term originates when the Animal Medical Center in New York City treated more than 100 cats who fell out of high-rise windows. That occurred during just five months in the 1980s and highlights the fact that cats can and do fall out of high structures. Read more The Ultimate Guide to Keeping Animals Happy & Healthy.PawTracks brings inspiration, tips, the best products on earth to ensure our readers and their pets are happy and healthy. Facebook Instagram Twitter Getting Started Dogs Cats Other Animals Shop About Us Contact Us Logo & Accolade Licensing Editorial Guidelines Portland New York Chicago Detroit Los Angeles Toronto Careers Advertise With Us Work With Us Diversity & Inclusion Terms of Use Privacy Policy Do Not Sell or Share My Information Manage cookie preferences Press Room Sitemap Digital Trends Media Group may earn a commission when you buy through links on our sites. ©2023 Digital Trends Media Group, a Designtechnica Company. All rights reserved. 

Prime Big Deal Days Tech Science Life Social Good Entertainment Deals Shopping Travel Search Cancel Prime Big Deal Days Tech Apps & Software Artificial Intelligence Cybersecurity Cryptocurrency Mobile Smart Home Social Media Tech Industry Transportation All Tech Science Space Climate Change Environment Video All Science Life Digital Culture Family & Parenting Health & Wellness Sex, Dating & Relationships Sleep Careers Mental Health All Life Social Good Activism Gender LGBTQ Racial Justice Sustainability Politics All Social Good Entertainment Games Movies Podcasts TV Shows Video Reviews Watch Guides All Entertainment SHOP THE BEST Home Tech Kitchen Fitness Sex Toys Apps & Software Dating Gift Guides Mashable Choice Mashable Selects Gaming All Best Products Travel Deals Best of All Travel Product Reviews Tech Life Beauty Tech Kitchen Kids/Toys Gaming Fitness Sex Toys Apps & Software All Product Reviews DEALS Home Tech TV Laptop VPN Vacuum Gaming Streaming Apple Mashable Shop All Deals Newsletters VIDEOS Mashable Shows All Videos Home > Life Cats, ranked Zero cats will care that we did this. By Chloe Bryan and Laura Vitto on August 10, 2018 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Flipboard Credit: Afton Almaraz / Stringer Which cat is the best cat? You're about to find out.Using the same complex (kind of) algorithm we used for our dog ranking, we have ranked 30 of the world's most popular cat breeds from thirtieth-best to first-best. And the absolute best part? Zero cats will care that we did this -- or care that we are alive at all. Cats! Don't! Care! SEE ALSO: Just 23 great photos of cats standing on two legs Of course, if you want to adopt a cat, be sure to check out your local shelter first. The cats there might not be certified by the Cat Fancier's Association, but we bet you will fancy them anyway.Now, our ranking:30. Havana Brown A rare Havana Brown cat is resting on a chair outdoors, shallow depth of field.; Shutterstock ID 300432482 Credit: Shutterstock / Stephen Orsillo A cat.29. Tonkinese Chocolate Cream coloured Tonkinese Cat sitting on a chair under the table; Shutterstock ID 546625075 Credit: Shutterstock / Belle Ciezak Another fine cat.28. Ocicat Ocicat; Shutterstock ID 579271288 Credit: Shutterstock / Jaroslaw Kurek Nice whiskers.27. American Shorthair Cat sitting. American Shorthair; Shutterstock ID 147791195 Credit: Shutterstock / Noko3 Your cat, probably.26. American Bobtail A photo of funny red american bobtail cats three monthes old on blured background; Shutterstock ID 669664954 Credit: Shutterstock / Ievgeniia Miroshnichenko Floof tail.25. Chartreux Chartreux Cat (Photo by Marka/UIG via Getty Images) Credit: UIG via Getty Images Cute cheeks.24. Singapura The Singapura breed of cat, declared by the Singapore government to be a living national monument (Photo by Visions of America/UIG via Getty Images) Credit: UIG via Getty Images Very small.23. RagaMuffin A ragamuffin cat is held by a jury member at the World Cat show in Athens on March 29, 2015. AFP PHOTO / LOUISA GOULIAMAKI (Photo credit should read LOUISA GOULIAMAKI/AFP/Getty Images) Credit: AFP/Getty Images Big fluff tail.22. LaPerm Laperm chocolate silver lynx on black background; Shutterstock ID 36623230 Credit: Shutterstock / Linn Currie Permanent perm.21. Siamese Siamese cat playing in the garden ; Shutterstock ID 613252148 Credit: Shutterstock / lucicatalin Meows a ton.20. Manx Brown classic tabby manx cat outdoors; Shutterstock ID 2649794 Credit: Shutterstock / Robynrg Very small tail.19. Burmilla Mandatory Credit: Photo by Erich Schmidt/imageBROKER/REX/Shutterstock (4257699a) Burmilla cat, kitten, tomcat, 14 weeks, red silver shaded colour VARIOUS Credit: Erich Schmidt/imageBROKER/REX/Shutterstock Introduced in 1981, it's a cross between a Chinchilla Persian and a Burmese.18. Balinese Mandatory Credit: Photo by Gerard Lacz/REX/Shutterstock (1922374a) Balinese Domestic Cat, Adult laying against Black Bakcground VARIOUS Credit: Gerard Lacz/REX/Shutterstock Can pull off round-frame glasses.17. Ragdoll ST HELENS, ENGLAND - JUNE 03: Farafalla Lock Up Your Daughter a Blue Pointed Picolour Ragdoll cat at Merseyside Cat Club Championship show at Sutton Leisure Centre on June 3, 2017 in St Helens, England. (Photo by Shirlaine Forrest/WireImage) Credit: WireImage Nice blue eyes.16. Birman BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND - NOVEMBER 20: A Tabby Point Birman Kitten named 'Felonie The Full Monty' sits next to his first place rosette after being exhibited at the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy's Supreme Cat Show held in the NEC on November 20, 2010 in Birmingham, England. The one-day Supreme Cat Show is one of the largest cat fancy competitions in Europe with 1196 cats being exhibited. This year's show is celebrating 100 years of the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy; exhibitors are aiming to have their cat named as the show's 'Supreme Exhibit' from the winners of the individual categories of: Persian, Semi-Longhair, British, Foreign, Burmese, Oriental and Siamese. (Photo by Oli Scarff/Getty Images) Credit: Getty Images Always in white gloves – very formal.15. Egyptian Mau BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND - NOVEMBER 22: Geniemau Yasmina Femi, an Egyptian Mau cat being judged at the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy's 'Supreme Championship Cat Show' at the NEC Arena on November 22, 2014 in Birmingham, England. The one-day Supreme Cat Show is one of the largest cat fancy competitions in Europe with over one thousand cats being exhibited. Exhibitors aim to have their cat named as the show's 'Supreme Exhibit' from the winners of the individual categories of: Persian, Semi-Longhair, British, Foreign, Burmese, Oriental, Siamese. (Photo by Rob Stothard/Getty Images) Credit: Getty Images Quite fast.14. Somali Somali cat portrait on fluffy bed lying and looking at camera; Shutterstock ID 389580601 Credit: Shutterstock / Nataliya Kuznetsova Giant fluffy tail.13. Turkish Angora turkish angora cat; Shutterstock ID 256073326 Credit: Shutterstock / Anastasia Koro The rich aunt of cats.12. Siberian Visitors pat Sheru, a Siberian cat, during the 8th International Cat Show organised by the World Cat Federation in Bangalore on July 30, 2017. / AFP PHOTO / MANJUNATH KIRAN (Photo credit should read MANJUNATH KIRAN/AFP/Getty Images) Credit: AFP/Getty Images A regal cat.11. Sphynx Canadain Sphynx cat at the show in Hala Lucznicka, Bydgoszcz, Poland on September 24 2016. Cats compete for prizes which in turn makes it possible for their owners to sell their cats as prize winning breeds fetching sometimes up to 500 Euros or more for a kitten. (Photo by Jaap Arriens/NurPhoto via Getty Images) Credit: NurPhoto via Getty Images The fuzzy peach of cats.10. Maine Coon (GERMANY OUT) cat, Maine Coon, Maine-Coon-Cat, American Longhair cat, domestic cat (Photo by Cuveland/ullstein bild via Getty Images) Credit: ullstein bild via Getty Images The state cat of Maine.9. Norwegian Forest Cat BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND - NOVEMBER 22: Sherman, a Norwegian Forest Kitten, is held by its owner before being judged at the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy's 'Supreme Championship Cat Show' at the NEC Arena on November 22, 2014 in Birmingham, England. The one-day Supreme Cat Show is one of the largest cat fancy competitions in Europe with over one thousand cats being exhibited. Exhibitors aim to have their cat named as the show's 'Supreme Exhibit' from the winners of the individual categories of: Persian, Semi-Longhair, British, Foreign, Burmese, Oriental, Siamese. (Photo by Rob Stothard/Getty Images) Credit: Getty Images A masterpiece.8. American Curl An american curl cat; Shutterstock ID 595151480 Credit: Shutterstock / Sel_Sanders Look at those ear tufts!7. Bengal Bengal Cat Hunting outdoor, on Nature green background; Shutterstock ID 627252926 Credit: Shutterstock / Seregraff #7, but certainly #1 in the "markings" category.6. Bombay Beautiful cute bombay black cat portrait with yellow eyes and attentive look in green grass and flowers in nature; Shutterstock ID 666025594 Credit: Shutterstock / Viktor Sergeevich Will bring you a lifetime of good luck.5. Persian persian cat; Shutterstock ID 257314705 Credit: Shutterstock / Piyato A stunning floof.4. British Shorthair A British Shorthair cat looks on during a cat exhibition in Bishkek on March 23, 2013. Cat lovers from Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan took part in the exhibition. AFP PHOTO/VYACHESLAV OSELEDKO (Photo credit should read VYACHESLAV OSELEDKO/AFP/Getty Images) Credit: AFP/Getty Images The symmetrical face of a gorgeous model.3. Japanese Bobtail Japanese bobtail black cat walking in the plantation; Shutterstock ID 558272140 Credit: Shutterstock / NANCY AYUMI KUNIHIRO A small tail.2. Scottish Fold Mandatory Credit: Photo by Anatoly Maltsev/EPA/REX/Shutterstock (7906540a) An Odd-eyed (different Colored Eyes) White Scottish Fold Kitten Poses For Pictures During a Cat Exhibition in Saint Petersburg Russia Saturday 18 September 2004 Cats From Various Different Breeds Compete in Four Different Categories in an International Cat Show of Federation International Feline Accosiation Which Runs From Saturday to Sunday Russia Cats Show - Sep 2004 Credit: Anatoly Maltsev/EPA/REX/Shutterstock Ears!!!!!!!1. Exotic Shorthair MOSCOW REGION, RUSSIA - DECEMBER 4, 2016: An Exotic Shorthair breed cat at the 2016 Grand Prix Royal Canin international cat show at the Crocus Expo Exhibition Center. Dmitry Serebryakov/TASS (Photo by Dmitry Serebryakov\TASS via Getty Images) Credit: Dmitry Serebryakov/TASS A squish-face angel. The pug of cats. Our ruler. Topics Animals Chloe Bryan Chloe was the shopping editor at Mashable. She was also previously a culture reporter. You can follow her on Twitter at @chloebryan. More from Furtastic Bird flies through someone's window, poops on their laptop, then just croaks Yikes. 08/14/2018 By Amanda Luz Henning Santiago Parrot tells firefighter to 'f*ck off' during rescue attempt Jessie the parrot was not in the mood to be saved. 08/14/2018 By Morgan Sung A dead baby orca and the intense grief of animals Cattle, javelinas, monkeys, and whales all mourn their dead. 08/14/2018 By Mark Kaufman Beauty YouTubers are making their pets pick out their makeup in a delightful new challenge Sure, why not? 08/14/2018 By Amanda Luz Henning Santiago Hundreds of 'sea potatoes' have washed up on a beach in Cornwall What are these mysterious water spuds? 08/13/2018 By Laura Byager Recommended For You iPhone SE 4 rumors: Everything we know so far Action Button and a larger display? Sign us up! 10/05/2023 By Stan Schroeder Pixel 8 vs. Pixel 8 Pro: What are the biggest differences? Is it worth it to shell out $300 more for the Pixel 8 Pro? 10/04/2023 By Kimberly Gedeon Google Pixel 8, Pixel 8 Pro officially announced. And there's a new built-in thermometer, too. Now with a better refresh rate on the base model and a temperature sensor on the Pro. 10/04/2023 By Alex Perry Pixel 8 Pro: Watch a leaked unboxing video ahead of the Google Pixel event The leaks keep coming. 10/03/2023 By Alex Perry How to watch Google Pixel event: Date and time of Pixel 8 reveal It's that time of year again. 10/02/2023 By Alex Perry Trending on Mashable NYT Connections today: See hints and answers for October 7 Everything you need to solve 'Connections' #118. 18 hours ago By Mashable Team NASA rover makes adventurous trip, then snaps stunning Mars picture An Earth-like vista. 10 hours ago By Mark Kaufman Wordle today: Here's the answer and hints for October 7 Here are some tips and tricks to help you find the answer to "Wordle" #840. 19 hours ago By Mashable Team How to watch the Colorado vs. Arizona State game without cable Both teams are hoping for their first conference win of 2023. 11 hours ago By Christina Buff X rolls out new ad format that can't be reported, blocked The new ads also don't disclose who the advertiser is or that they are even ads. 10/06/2023 By Matt Binder The biggest stories of the day delivered to your inbox. Loading... Subscribe This newsletter may contain advertising, deals, or affiliate links. Subscribing to a newsletter indicates your consent to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You may unsubscribe from the newsletters at any time. Thanks for signing up. See you at your inbox! TECH SCIENCE LIFE SOCIAL GOOD ENTERTAINMENT BEST PRODUCTS DEALS About Mashable Contact Us We're Hiring Newsletters Sitemap Mashable supports Group Black and its mission to increase greater diversity in media voices and media ownership. Group Black's collective includes Essence, TheShadeRoom and Afro-Punk. ©2005–2023 Mashable, Inc., a Ziff Davis company. All Rights Reserved. Mashable is a registered trademark of Ziff Davis and may not be used by third parties without express written permission. About Ziff Davis Privacy Policy Terms of Use Advertise Accessibility Do Not Sell My Personal Information AdChoices 

Mar 14, 2023BY: The FeedTop Seven Cat Breeds: See ListScottish Fold CatsScottish Fold cats are renowned for their laid-back disposition and for being incredibly loving and sociable with people and other domestic animals. The breed is also known for its gentle voice and versatility in producing purrs and meows.Image Source: britannica-encyclopedia​American Shorthair CatsBrought to North America by early settlers from Europe, the American Shorthair breed is now a household favorite. They are known for having an even temperament, a decent demeanor, and sharp intelligence.Image Source: britannica-encyclopediaMaine Coon CatsOne of the oldest natural breeds in North America, Maine Coon cats are renowned for their size, intelligence, and playfulness. They are affectionately referred to as "gentle giants" and are one of the largest domestic cat breeds.Image Source: britannica-encyclopediaPersian CatsThe Persian cat, one of the oldest breeds, is not only the most commonly kept feline but also dates back to 1684 B.C., according to hieroglyphics. Named after their perceived origin, Persia, these cats have a long and fascinating history.Image Source: britannica-encyclopediaBritish Shorthair CatsThe British Shorthair is believed to have been introduced to England by the Romans in the first century, where the country's native wild cats and the breed coexisted and reproduced.Image Source: britannica-encyclopediaRagdoll CatsRagdolls, one of the biggest cat breeds, are frequently referred to as "puppy-cats". They are incredibly amiable and mild-mannered, and they frequently seek out human company.Image Source: britannica-encyclopediaExotic Shorthair CatsThe Exotic cat has surpassed the Persian cat as America's most popular registered feline for the third consecutive year, breaking the Persian's 31-year reign as the top cat breed.Image Source: britannica-encyclopediaThanks For Reading!Next: How to Prepare for a Possible Layoff?Read Next 

Skip to content About Us Our Team About Us – Video Careers Pet Care Dog Services Cat Services Bird Services Pocket Pet Services New Pet Owner Information Online Store Resources Blog FAQs Helpful Resources Contact 604-463-7100 Menu ×Close 604-463-7100 About Us Our Team About Us – Video Careers Pet Care Dog Services Cat Services Bird Services Pocket Pet Services New Pet Owner Information Online Store Resources Blog FAQs Helpful Resources Contact Search the site: Search Get In Touch Alouette Animal Hospital Phone: 604-463-7100 Email: info@alouetteanimalhospital.ca After Hours Emergencies: Animal Emergency Clinic of the Fraser Valley 604-514-1711 See our address & hours × Search the site: Search General 10 Pet Care Tips 1. Regular Exams are Vital Just like you, your pet can get heart problems, develop arthritis, or have a toothache. The best way to prevent such problems or catch them early is to see your veterinarian every year. Regular exams are the single most important way to keep pets healthy. Annual vet visits should touch on nutrition and weight control, as well as cover recommended vaccinations, parasite control, dental exam, and health screenings. 2. Spay and Neuter Your Pets Eight million to 10 million pets end up in U.S. shelters every year. Some are lost, some have been abandoned, and some are homeless. Here’s an easy way to avoid adding to that number — spay and neuter your cats and dogs. It’s a procedure that can be performed as early as six to eight weeks of age. Spaying and neutering doesn’t just cut down on the number of unwanted pets; it has other substantial benefits for your pet. Studies show it also lowers the risk of certain cancers and reduces a pet’s risk of getting lost by decreasing the tendency to roam. 3. Prevent Parasites Fleas are the most common external parasite that can plague pets, and they can lead to irritated skin, hair loss, hot spots, and infection. Fleas can also introduce other parasites into your cat or dog. All it takes is for your pet to swallow one flea, and it can to end up with tapeworms, the most common internal parasite affecting dogs and cats. Year-round prevention is key. Regular flea and intestinal parasite control, as well as heartworm prevention in endemic areas is important. Because some parasite medications made for dogs can be fatal to cats, talk to your vet about keeping your precious pets worm-free, flea-free — and safe. 4. Maintain a Healthy Weight Many dogs and cats are overweight or obese. And just like people, obesity in pets comes with health risks that include diabetes, arthritis, and cancer. Overfeeding is the leading cause of obesity, says Douglas, who adds that keeping our pets trim can add years to their lives. Because pets need far fewer calories than most of us think — as little as 185-370 a day for a small, inactive dog; just 240-350 calories daily for a 10-pound cat — talk to your vet, who can make feeding suggestions based on your pet’s age, weight, and lifestyle. 5. Get Regular Vaccinations For optimal health, pets need regular vaccinations against diseases such as rabies, distemper, feline leukemia, and canine hepatitis. How often your dog or cat needs to be immunized depends on their age, lifestyle, health, and risks so talk to your vet about the vaccinations that make sense for your pet. 6. Provide an Enriched Environment An enriched environment is another key to the long-term health and welfare of your canine and feline friends. Pets need mental stimulation which may mean daily walks for your pooch, and scratching posts, window perches, and toys for your cat. It means play time with you, which not only keeps your pet’s muscles toned and boredom at bay, it also strengthens your bond with your four-footed companions. 7. Microchip and Tattoo Your Pet Lack of identification means as few as 14% of pets ever find their way home after getting lost. Fortunately, microchipping and/or tattooing can allow for the pet to be reunited with its. About the size of a rice grain, a microchip is inserted under the skin in less than a second. It needs no battery and can be scanned by a vet or an animal control officer in seconds. 8. Pets Need Dental Care, Too Just like you, your pet can suffer from gum disease, tooth loss, and tooth pain. And just like you, regular brushing and oral cleanings help keep your pet’s teeth strong and healthy. Dental disease is one of the most common preventable illnesses in pets yet many people never even look in their pet’s mouths. It’s estimated 80% of dogs and 70% cats show signs of dental disease by age three, leading to abscesses, loose teeth, and chronic pain. In addition to regular dental cleanings by your vet, periodontal disease can be avoided by proper dental care by owners. Owner care includes brushing, oral rinses, and dental treats. 9. Never Give Pets People Medication Medicines made for humans can kill your pet. As a matter of fact, in 2010 the ASPCA listed human drugs in the top 10 pet toxins. NSAIDs like ibuprofen and naproxen are the most common pet poisoning culprits, but antidepressants, decongestants, muscle relaxants, and acetaminophen are just a few of the human drugs that pose health risks to pets. Human drugs can cause kidney damage, seizures, and cardiac arrest in a dog or cat. If you suspect your pet has consumed your medication — or anything toxic — call your veterinarian. 10. Proper Restraint in a Vehicle You buckle up for safety when you’re in the car, shouldn’t your pet? Unrestrained pets in a car are a distraction to the driver, and can put driver and pet at risk for serious injury. To keep pets safe in transit: Never allow pets to travel in the front seat, where they’re at risk of severe injury or death if the airbag deploys. Don’t let dogs ride with their head out the window or untethered in the back of a truck bed. Both practices put them at risk of being thrown from the vehicle in the event of an accident. To keep pets safe, confine cats to carriers, then secure the carrier with a seatbelt. For dogs, there’s the option of a special harness attached to a seat belt, or a well-secured kennel. For more information please visit the following link https://pets.webmd.com/ask-pet-health-11/vets-pet-care Share This Post Post navigation Next Post: What Is Kennel Cough? Back to the Blog Save Time, Order Online! We are happy to provide you with the option to browse and shop for your pet, all from the comfort of your own home! 604-463-7100 Visit Our Store Alouette Animal Hospital Contact 604-463-7100 Email: info@alouetteanimalhospital.ca Address 21409 Lougheed Hwy. Maple Ridge, British Columbia V2X 2R8 View on Google Maps Hours of Operation Monday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmTuesday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmWednesday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmThursday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmFriday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmSaturday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmSunday ClosedCLOSED ON STATUTORY HOLIDAYS After Hours Emergencies Animal Emergency Clinic of the Fraser Valley 604-514-1711 Home Our Team Careers Blog Contact Us Privacy Policy © 2023 Alouette Animal Hospital 

Skip Navigation Where To Buy Sign Up & Save For Dogs FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint For Cats FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Learn Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Contact Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Skip Navigation For Dogs For Cats Learn Contact FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Where To Buy Sign Up & Save Home 10 Everyday Helpful Pet Care Tips | Hill's Pet 10 Responsible Pet Care Tips tags routine-care Dog Cat Published by min read Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Find food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Shop All Cat Food Find a dog food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Find a cat food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Cat Food As a pet parent you want to do everything you can to care for your pet; this involves regular, everyday activities to ensure they stay happy and healthy. Practice these ten responsible pet care tips year after year for a lifetime of happy and healthy cats and dogs. 1. Veterinarian Visits Responsible pet ownership starts with regular visits to the veterinarian. Given their shorter-than-human lifespan, your dog or cat should be getting a checkup at least once or twice a year. Depending on your pet's vaccination schedule, they may go more frequently when they're young, but establishing and maintaining good pet health means keeping up with vet visits as they age. Trips to the vet can be, shall we say, challenging. Cats, in particular, may be averse to leaving the comfy confines of their home, but there are ways to reduce stress for both of you. Acclimating your cat to her carrier when she is a kitten is good practice (and avoids the running-away-and-hiding-under-the-bed scenario). Dogs tend to like going for car rides. Take your pup on joyrides, so he won't associate getting into the car with going to the vet. And many pets don't mind a trip to the veterinarian's office, especially if you choose a vet that's a good fit for your little friend. 2. Vaccinations Vaccinating your pets is a vital component of responsible pet care. Soon after welcoming your new pet into your home, schedule an immunization appointment. During your first visit, the vet will set up an immunization schedule for your little pup or kitten to protect them from illness and disease. Vaccinations for puppies should happen early in your puppies first few weeks after you bring him home. Talk to your vet at your first appointment, on when a good time to schedule that visit. They help prevent diseases such as rabies, Lyme disease, and distemper. Cats benefit from vaccines that prevent feline herpes virus, feline leukemia, and rabies. If you've adopted an adult or senior animal, make sure they are immunized, too. Vaccinations do need renewal and aren't just for young pets. 3. Proper Identification If the unthinkable happens and your little guy or gal gets lost — youngsters in particular are prone to dashing out the door — having proper identification is the key to a happy ending. Start with the basics: a safe collar, and a tag that contains all of your contact information. In addition to an ID tag, microchipping your pet is advisable, because there's always the chance a collar will fall off. The microchip, an electronic device about the size and shape of a grain of rice, is implanted under your pet's skin and can be read by a scanner that pulls up your identification information. A combination of these forms of identification will go a long way to reuniting you and your beloved pet, but only if you keep your contact information up-to-date. Be sure to change your information on file with the microchip if you have a change in address or phone number. 4. Spaying/Neutering Sterilizing your pet prevents a host of health problems, including complicated pregnancies, and reduces the number of homeless animals. Spaying your kitty (removing the uterus and ovaries) greatly reduces her risk for cervical cancer, eliminates the risk of ovarian cancer, and prevents her from going into "heat." That minimizes the chance that she'll stray from home in search of a partner, and any nearby male cats will be less aggressive (and they won't spray to mark their territory, something that benefits you and your furniture). Neutering your puppy helps alleviate aggression and roaming the neighborhood, and will prevent him from getting testicular cancer. Because spaying or neutering is surgery that requires general anesthesia, your pet will likely stay overnight at the vet's office for at least one night for observation and recuperation. 5. Healthy Food Two connected elements of responsible pet ownership include providing animals with fresh, cool water and healthy food at all times. The right pet food will enrich your best buddy's life, providing them with the energy and nutrients they need. With so many meal options to choose from, it can be daunting, but you can become adept in no time by familiarizing yourself with important ingredients and how they help your pup or kitty. When choosing the best cat food, look for a good balance of protein, carbs and fats. These are important ingredients for dog food, too, as is plenty of fiber for the digestive system. In addition to healthy ingredients, select a pet food formula that is appropriate for your pet's age, health conditions and activity level, and speak to your vet before switching your pet to a specialized food. 6. At-Home Care As your pets' caretaker, your job is to provide them with good hygiene habits at home as well as at the vet's or groomer's. Brushing their teeth, combing their coats and providing them with healthy food all keeps them in tip-top shape. To stay on track with responsible pet care, schedule hygiene and grooming tasks in your calendar and try combining tasks, such as a comforting comb after trimming nails, until it becomes routine. 7. Comfy Quarters As the seasons change or you rearrange your living space, take a look around to see that you're providing your pet with a safe, cozy habitat. Dog bed looking a little flat? Buy your pup a new one. Litter box area not cutting it anymore? Spruce up your kitty's bathroom with a new box and scoop. This also is a good time to check for potential hazards. Look for exposed cords or wires (young animals find these to be great chew toys), secure safety gates, repair loose windows or screens and remove any plants that are poisonous to your pet. 8. Training and Socializing One of the most important aspects of responsible pet care is ensuring your dog or cat is well-trained, and proper socializing is a part of that. Starting when they're young is best and most effective, but it's never too late to learn new tricks. Toilet training is the number one priority for any animal with whom you share your home, as is working on obedience training. Learning socialization skills will help your puppy or kitten bond with you and with other pets. Ask your vet or local animal shelter for recommendations for good trainers in your area or at-home training guides to read. A well-trained pet is a happy pet, and that translates to a happy pet parent. 9. Following Dog Park Rules Taking your dog outside to play is one heck of a good time, and, being the social creatures they are, dogs love a good romp outdoors. If you decide to take your pup to a dog park, abide by the posted rules. Proper dog park etiquette, such as bringing your own toys and not bringing in food, keeps everyone safe, especially if a dog is aggressive or under-socialized. Bring along treats for afterward to reward your guy for his good behavior. Vets also recommend that you wait until your dog is at least four months old before bringing him to the dog park to ensure he's vaccinated before being exposed to other animals. 10. Safe Playtime It's no secret that dogs and cats love to play, and it's an effective relationship-building activity. Take stock of their toys. Are they safe? Be mindful of threadbare stuffed toys that pose choking hazards and hard, sharp edges that could cause injury. Throw away and replace playthings that are worn out. Making DIY cat toys and dog toys is a great, inexpensive way to bring even more fun to pet parenting! Remember, these tips aren't applicable just during pet holidays — make them part of your regular pet parenting role, and you and your pets will reap the benefits for a lifetime! Contributor Bio Christine O'Brien Christine O'Brien is a writer, mom, and long-time cat parent whose two Russian Blues rule the house. Her work also appears in Care.com, What to Expect, and Fit Pregnancy, where she writes about pets, pregnancy, and family life. Find and follow her on Instagram and Twitter @brovelliobrien. Related Articles Related Products Related Articles Pet Food Storage Tips Where you store your cat and dog food can make a big difference in the quality and freshness once it is opened. Here are some common questions and recommendations for optimal storage for all of Hill’s dry and canned cat and dog food. Keeping Your Pet Healthy: Important Questions to Ask Your Vet In addition to a balanced, nutritous diet and exercise, your vet is an important resource for maintaining good health in your pet. Protecting your pets this Christmas – a cautionary tale by Simon Pudsey Christmas is a fantastically stimulating time of year and some of that excitement might rub off on our pets. However, pet parent temptations could result in unfortunate illness or even worse; a very much unexpected trip to the vet for our furry friends. What to Do When Your Pet is Sprayed by a Skunk Learn about helping a curious cat who gets sprayed by a skunk and the removal of odors from your good friends at Hills Pet Nutrition. Related products Hill's Science Diet Adult Chicken Recipe Cat Food Supports healthy immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful fur Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Ocean Fish Entrée Cat Food Precisely balanced nutrition with the delicious taste of savory minced ocean fish to help fuel the energy needs of cats during the prime of their life. Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Healthy Cuisine Roasted Chicken & Rice Medley Cat Food Delicious roasted chicken and rice in a mouthwatering sauce Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Savory Chicken Entrée Cat Food Delectable chunks with tender chicken smothered in a rich gravy. Buy Now » Our Brands Prescription Diet Science Diet Browse By Age For Dogs Puppy Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) For Cats Kitten Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) Education Cat Articles And Tips Dog Articles and Tips Nutritional Philosophy About Hill's Our Company Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Careers Create or Manage a Business Account Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Shelter Partners Natural Disaster Support United States [English] (opens a modal dialog) FacebookTwitterPinterestInstagramYoutube Hillsvet.com Site Map Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Do Not Sell My Personal Information ©2021 Hill's Pet Nutrition, Inc. As used herein, denotes registered trademark status in the U.S. only; registration status in other geographies may be different. Your use of this site is subject to the terms of our Legal Statement. About our Ads. Cookie Consent Tool PLEASE SELECT YOUR PREFERRED LOCATION AND LANGUAGE Argentina Australia Austria - Österreich Беларусь Belgium - België Belgium - Belgique Belize Bolivia Brazil - Brasil България Canada (English) Canada (Français) Chile Colombia Costa Rica Croatia - Hrvatska Cyprus - English Cyprus - Greek Czech Republic - Česká Republika Denmark - Danmark Dominican Republic - República Dominicana Ecuador Eesti Finland - Suomi France - France Грузия Germany - Deutschland Greater China - Hong Kong SAR Greater China - Hong Kong SAR – (English) Greater China - Taiwan Greece - Ελλάδα Guatemala Honduras Magyarország India Indonesia Ireland ישראל Italy - Italia 日本 Latvia - Latvija Lietuva Malaysia (Bahasa) México Netherlands - Nederland New Zealand Nicaragua Norway - Norge Panamá Paraguay Peru Philippines (English) Poland - Polska Portugal Puerto Rico (English) Puerto Rico (Español) 대한민국 Republic of Singapore (English) România Russia - Россия Srbija Slovensko Slovenija South Africa Spain - España Sweden - Sverige Switzerland (Suisse) Switzerland (Schweiz) Svizzera Thailand - ไทย Turkey - Türkiye United Kingdom Ukraine - Україна United Arab Emirates (English) United States Uruguay Venezuela 

Select Region United States United Kingdom Germany India Australia Italy Canada Credit Cards Credit Cards Credit Cards Compare Credit Cards Best Credit Cards 2023 Credit Card Comparison Best Travel Credit Cards Best Cash Back Credit Cards Best 0% APR Credit Cards Best Balance Transfer Credit Cards Best Rewards Credit Cards Best Airline Credit Cards Best Credit Cards for International Travel Best Credit Cards For Bad Credit Best Student Credit Cards Best Secured Credit Cards Best First Credit Cards Best Credit Cards For No Credit Best Gas Credit Cards Compare Business Cards Best Business Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards For Travel Best Cash Back Business Credit Cards Best 0% APR Business Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards For Startups Credit Card Reviews Capital One Venture X Chase Sapphire Preferred American Express Platinum Chase Sapphire Reserve American Express Gold Wells Fargo Active Cash More Credit Card Reviews Credit Cards By Issuer Best Wells Fargo Credit Cards Best American Express Credit Cards Best Chase Credit Cards Best Capital One Credit Cards Best Discover Credit cards Calculators Credit Card Interest Calculator Balance Transfer Calculator Credit Card Payoff Calculator Credit Score Best Credit Monitoring Services How To Check Your Credit Score What Is A Good Credit Score Credit Repair Best Credit Repair Companies How To Fix Your Credit In 7 Easy Steps How Much Does Credit Repair Cost? Loans Loans Loans Personal Loans Best Personal Loans Personal Loan Rates Compare Personal Loans Best Debt Consolidation Loans Best Low-Interest Personal Loans Best Personal Loans For Fair Credit Best Bad Credit Loans Best Joint Personal Loans Easiest Personal Loans Best Wedding Loans Best Personal Loans For Veterans Student Loans Best Student Loan Refinance Lenders Best Student Loans Best Parent Loan For College Best Low-Interest Student Loans Best Graduate Student Loans Best Medical School Loans Lenders To Refinance Parent PLUS Loans Student Loan Forgiveness FAQ Student Loan Forgiveness Programs Student Loan Calculator Student Loan Refinance Calculator Business Loans Best Business Loans Best Business Lines Of Credit Best Working Capital Loans Best Unsecured Business Loans Best Same-Day Business Loans Best Startup Business Loans Best Business Loans For Bad Credit Fast Approval Business Loans Business Loan Calculator Auto Loans Auto Loan Rates Auto Loan Refinancing Rates Auto Loan Refinancing Lenders Mortgages Mortgages Mortgages Home Buying & Refinancing Best Mortgage Lenders Best Mortgage Refinance Lenders Best Online Mortgage Lenders Best VA Mortgage Lenders Best USDA Mortgage Lenders Best Mortgage Lenders for FHA Loans When Should You Refinance? Mortgage Rates Today's Mortgage Rates Current Mortgage Rates: Compare Today’s Rates Today's Mortgage Refinance Rates Current Mortgage Refinance Rates 30 Year Mortgage Rates 15 Year Mortgage Rates 10 Year Mortgage Rates Today’s VA Mortgage Rates Today’s VA Refinance Rates Historical Mortgage Rates Home Equity Loans Best Home Equity Loan Lenders Best Home Equity Loan Rates Home Equity Loan Calculator Best HELOC Lenders Best HELOC Rates Calculators Mortgage Amortization Calculator Mortgage APR Calculator Cash-Out Refinance Calculator Mortgage Refinance Calculator Mortgage Calculator HELOC Calculator Real Estate How Much House Can I Afford? Calculator Cost of Living Calculator Housing Market Predictions Most Affordable Cities To Buy A Home Insurance Insurance Insurance Car Insurance Best Car Insurance Cheap Car Insurance Online Car Insurance Quotes Car Insurance Calculator Cost Of Car Insurance Best Car Insurance In Florida Best Car Insurance In California Best Car Insurance In Texas Travel Insurance Best Travel Insurance Best Covid Travel Insurance Best Cruise Travel Insurance Cancel For Any Reason Insurance How Much Is Travel Insurance? Cheap Travel Insurance Travel Insurance & Destinations Life Insurance Best Life Insurance Best Term Life Insurance Best Senior Life Insurance No-Exam Life Insurance Compare Life Insurance Quotes How Much Is Life Insurance? Cheap Life Insurance Life Insurance Calculator Homeowners Insurance Best Home Insurance Companies Compare Home Insurance Quotes Home Insurance Calculator Average Cost Of Homeowners Insurance How Much Home Insurance Do I Need? Renters Insurance Best Renters Insurance Cheap Renters Insurance How Much Is Renters Insurance? Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Pet Insurance Quotes: Compare and Save Is Pet Insurance Worth It In 2023? Cheap Pet Insurance How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? Pet Insurance Pre-Existing Conditions Health Insurance Best Health Insurance Companies Short-Term Health Insurance Best Disability Insurance Health Insurance for Small Business Best Dental Insurance Companies Best Vision Insurance Companies Business Insurance Best Small Business Insurance Commercial Auto Insurance General Liability Insurance Cyber Liability Insurance Business Interruption Insurance Banking Banking Banking Best Banks Best Banks Best Online Banks Best Credit Unions Best Budget Apps Bank Promotions & Bonuses Best Bank Bonuses & Promotions Capital One Promotions Chase Promotions Wells Fargo Checking Account Bonus Bank Of America Promotions US Bank Promotions CDs Best CD Rates CD Rates Today CD Interest Rates Forecast 3 Month CD Rates 6 Month CD Rates 1 Year CD Rates 3 Year CD Rates 5 Year CD Rates 10 Year CD Rates No Penalty CD Rates Jumbo CD Rates Savings Best Savings Accounts Best High Yield Savings Accounts Best Savings Accounts For Kids Best Business Savings Accounts Best Money Market Accounts Checking Best Checking Accounts Best High Yield Checking Accounts Best Teen Checking Accounts Best Student Checking Accounts Best No Fee Checking Accounts Best Business Checking Accounts Taxes Best Tax Software Best Tax Apps Tax Relief Services Tax Brackets 2023 Income Tax Calculator Paycheck Calculator Money Transfer International Money Transfer Currency Calculator Investing Investing Investing Investing Basics Best Online Brokers Best Online Brokers For Day Trading Best Investment Apps Best Investment Management Apps Best Robo Advisors Gold Price Today Best Gold IRA Companies Wealth Financial Advisors Wealth Advisors Wealth Management Financial Planner Small Business Small Business Small Business Forming A Business Best LLC Services Best Registered Agent Services How to Start an LLC Cost to Form an LLC HR & Payroll Best Payroll Services Best HR Software Best PEO Services Best Recruiting Software Web Design & Hosting Best Website Builder Best Web Hosting Services Best Blogging Platforms Best Web Hosting Services VoIP & Communication Best VoIP Services Best Cheap VoIP Services Best Business Cell Phone Plans How to Get a Free Business Phone Number Project Management Best Project Management Software Best Free Project Management Software Best Gantt Chart Software Privacy & Security Best VPNs Best Cheap VPN Best Antivirus Software Best Password Managers Legal Legal Legal Find A Lawyer Best Personal Injury Lawyers Best Car Accident Lawyers Best Truck Accident Lawyers Best Motorcycle Accident Lawyers Legal Services Best Online Divorce Services Best Trademark Registration Services Best Name Change Services Best Prepaid Legal Services USA UK DE IN AU IT CA USA | Change Region Back to Forbes.com USA UK DE IN AU IT CA USA | Change Region You might be using an unsupported or outdated browser. To get the best possible experience please use the latest version of Chrome, Firefox, Safari, or Microsoft Edge to view this website. advisor Pet Insurance Advertiser Disclosure 25 Dog Care Tips For Pet Parents Ashley KilroyContributorAshley is a personal finance writer and content creator. In addition to being a contributing writer at Forbes, she writes for solo entrepreneurs as well as for Fortune 500 companies. Through her financial expertise, she provides millennials and young professionals the tools and resources they need to better manage their finances.Ashley Kilroy Ashley KilroyContributorAshley is a personal finance writer and content creator. In addition to being a contributing writer at Forbes, she writes for solo entrepreneurs as well as for Fortune 500 companies. Through her financial expertise, she provides millennials and young professionals the tools and resources they need to better manage their finances.Contributor Jason MetzeditorJason Metz is a writer who has worked in the insurance industry since 2007. As a former claims handler and fraud investigator, he’s seen a lot, and enjoys helping others navigate the complexities and opaqueness of insurance. He has a B.S. in Criminal Justice from Kutztown University and an M.F.A. in Creative Writing from the University of California Riverside, Palm Desert.Fact CheckedJason MetzJason MetzeditorJason Metz is a writer who has worked in the insurance industry since 2007. As a former claims handler and fraud investigator, he’s seen a lot, and enjoys helping others navigate the complexities and opaqueness of insurance. He has a B.S. in Criminal Justice from Kutztown University and an M.F.A. in Creative Writing from the University of California Riverside, Palm Desert.editorFact CheckedUpdated: Oct 3, 2022, 8:21am Editorial Note: We earn a commission from partner links on Forbes Advisor. Commissions do not affect our editors' opinions or evaluations. Getty As a dog owner, you may adore your pooch as if it were your own flesh and blood. And just like your children, you want to ensure you provide the best care possible so your dog can live a happy and healthy life. If you’re striving to be an excellent pet parent, here are some dog care tips to help you along the way. Is Your Dog Covered? Get Peace of Mind With the Best Pet Insurance of 2023 Learn More Meet Your Dog’s Basic Needs As a dog owner, it’s essential to understand and meet your pet’s basic needs. Whether you’re a novice pet parent or an expert, you’ll need to set the stage for your new pup. Your dog’s basic needs will consist of nutritious food, water, treats, toys and bedding to make the pup feel right at home. When you bring a new dog into your home, it’s best to make a trip to the vet as soon as possible. Your vet can help you pinpoint the right type and the amount of food and other important things you need to know about caring for your new friend. Monitor food consumption More than one-third (34%) of dogs were diagnosed as obese, according to the most recent data from Banfield Pet Hospital, which has more than 1,000 veterinary hospitals in 42 states. That’s a 108% increase from 2011 to 2020. Unfortunately, overweight canines are susceptible to many health risks such as metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease or poor immune systems. While you may want to spoil your pet, avoid spoiling them with food. Provide sufficient water throughout the day All dogs need to have clean and fresh water available at all times of the day. Make sure to replenish the water and wash all food and water dishes so they don’t hold bacteria. Regularly groom your dog Regularly grooming your pet ensures they are clean and pest-free. While some dogs only need a bath every few months, others need regular grooming. If your dog sheds, you’ll want to brush it often. Nail trimming is also a must. Neglecting to trim your dog’s nails can cause health problems such as injured tendons and deformed feet. Maintain Your Dog’s Health with Routine Care Proactively tending to your pet’s well-being and health care ensures it lives the very best and healthiest life possible. If you have pet insurance, you can usually offset the cost of routine care by adding a wellness package to your plan. For example, the average cost of a vet office visit is about $61, according to a Forbes Advisor analysis of veterinarian costs, while the average cost for a series of vaccinations (bivalent influenza, bordetella, DAPP, leptospirosis, Lyme disease and rabies) costs about $202. Schedule annual check-ups with your vet One of the best ways to keep your pet healthy is to visit the vet regularly so they can examine your dog for any health concerns. Look for solutions for flea, tick and heartworm prevention Fleas and ticks put you and your pet’s health at risk since they can transmit diseases like Lyme disease, plague and Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Heartworms can cause damage to your dog’s arteries, heart and lungs. Talk to your veterinarian about preventative measures, such as topical and oral medications. Maintain proper vaccinations Vaccinations help protect your dog’s body from invasive diseases. Standard canine vaccines usually include parvovirus, distemper, rabies and canine hepatitis. If you groom or board your pooch, you may also need a vaccine against Bordetella bronchiseptica, which can cause kennel cough. Your vet can help pinpoint the vaccines appropriate for your hound. Consider spaying or neutering your pet Spaying and neutering pets isn’t just about population control—it can help protect your canine companion from certain diseases. For example, spaying your female dog can decrease her chances of uterus infections and breast tumors. Neutering male dogs can protect them from testicular cancer and prostate concerns. Brush your dog’s teeth While often overlooked, dental care is also essential for maintaining your pet’s health. Regularly brushing your pup’s teeth can help prevent dental illnesses that can end up affecting your dog’s kidney and liver function. Dental cleaning might also be recommended, but it can cost a few hundred dollars to $1,000, depending on your location. Some pet insurance companies, such as Lemonade pet insurance, sell add-ons to help offset the cost of dental care, including routine dental cleanings. Related: Pet dental insurance explained Stimulate Your Dog’s Brain and Body A balance of physical and mental stimulation plays a significant role in your dog’s health. It can also encourage good behavior while discouraging harmful behaviors that can wreak havoc on your patience and home. As the saying goes: A tired dog is a good dog. Exercise your dog every day Regular exercise promotes bone, joint, muscle and organ health. Walking can also eliminate boredom and provide mental stimulation. You can also create an exercise routine with your pet, such as climbing stairs, going for a hike or running around the backyard. While different sizes and breeds of dogs require varying levels of exercise, creating an exercise routine with your four-legged friend is essential. Challenge your dog’s brain Man’s best friend benefits from mental stimulation. Teach your dog new tricks, play new games and create puzzles. Since dogs have a heightened sense of smell, they love using their nose to explore. Try scattering a few treats around the home for your dog to find. Create a slow-pace mealtime Some dogs love gobbling up their food in one gulp. But eating too quickly may create digestive issues or result in vomiting. Slow down your dog’s eating habits. Consider a puzzle feeder at mealtime or place a tennis ball in their food bowl so they have to eat around it. Keep Your Pet Safe Dangers are lurking inside and outside of your home that could cause harm to your pooch. Here are some tips for keeping your dog safe and out of trouble. Register your pup State and local pet laws often require dog owners to register their pets. Check your local municipalities so you can ensure your dog is properly licensed. You’ll want to attach the license to its collar to prove your dog is registered if it gets lost. Consider a microchip If your dog becomes lost, a microchip can help you locate your pet. Microchips are painless to implant and contain your contact information. They can usually be scanned at animal shelters and veterinary offices. Some pet insurance plans cover the cost of microchipping. Secure trash, chemicals and toxins around your home Dogs are curious creatures, but sometimes their curiosity can put them at risk of injury or illness—especially when exploring your home. To keep your dog out of harm’s way, secure your trash, toxins and other chemicals found around the house. Create a safe space for your dog Dogs can feel anxious or stressed under certain situations, like the sound of thunder or noisy houseguests. Creating a safe space for your pet can provide comfort and security when it needs to retreat. Have a place in your home with some creature comforts such as a bed, blanket, toys and fresh water. Clean your dog’s stuff Washing your dog’s toys, blankets and bedding removes germs, dirt, pollen and other things that can irritate your pet. Some dogs suffer from seasonal allergies, so make sure you wash your dog’s bedding on a regular basis. Keep food out of your dog’s reach Food items such as avocados, chocolate and onions are toxic to dogs. Keeping these items out of their reach can help avoid some serious health consequences. Generally, you shouldn’t give your pup “people food” like your leftovers. But some “people food” items such as plain chicken, plain rice and canned pumpkin might be recommended by your vet for specific problems, like digestive issues. Use a leash while in public By always using a leash in public places, you can help your pet avoid accidents and injuries. For example, if your dog spots a squirrel and bolts after it, your dog could be at risk of getting hit by a car. Train and Bond with Your Dog to Strengthen Your Relationship Bonding and training your dog go hand-in-hand. By doing both, you are building a relationship of respect, communication and companionship. Prioritize one-on-one time with your pup Dogs flourish on love and affection from their owners. Prioritizing daily interactions with your pet strengthens your bond. You can do so by petting, playing and giving your dog treats. Practice patience and consistency Training a dog takes a lot of patience and consistency. Dogs can sense negative energy, so if they feel as though you’re angry or agitated, they may not perform as well. If you’re struggling to train your dog, consult with a professional or ask your vet for guidance. Remember, training your pup won’t happen overnight, so stick with it—the results are worth it. Consider positive reinforcement training Practicing positive reinforcement training means you reward your pet for good behaviors and ignore the bad. This training method builds your dog’s confidence, encourages cooperation and increases tolerance. On top of that, it can bolster your bond with your canine. Seasonal Care Tips Varying temperatures and weather conditions can impact how to care for your furry confidant. Here are some tips to keep in mind whether it’s winter, spring, summer or fall. Monitor your pet’s time outside In the winter, frigid temperatures can cause frostbite on your dog’s ears, paws and tail. In the summer months, heat can dehydrate your pup and cause heat stroke. Make sure you keep an eye on the weather and limit your dog’s time outside in extreme weather. Related: How To Keep Pets Safe During Extreme Summer Heat Waves Pay close attention to your dog’s paws In the winter months, salt and ice can contribute to cracks in the pads of your pet’s feet. While in the summer months, hot asphalt or concrete can create burns and cause pain. Consider using booties to protect your dog’s paws, or try walking in the grass. Related: Why Do Dogs Eat Grass? Steer clear of toxic algae When hiking, walking or simply venturing around your property, a run-in with water containing toxic algae can make your dog very sick. Check your local Parks and Recreation department to identify bodies of water that could contain harmful bacteria or toxins that may cause harm to your dog. Avoid leaving your pet in a hot car Never leave your dog unsupervised in the car. Even if you think the weather outside is comfortable, temperatures can quickly reach dangerous levels, putting your dog at risk for serious illness or death. The temperature inside your car can increase by 20 degrees in just 10 minutes, according to the American Veterinary Medical Association. Plan for Unexpected Vet Bills with Pet Insurance Even with the best planning and preventive measures, unexpected accidents and illnesses can still happen, which can result in major vet bills. For example, your dog might tear its cruciate ligament while chasing a ball or it might get sick with a serious illness such as cancer. A good way to help offset vet bills is with pet insurance. And it may be more affordable than you think. The average cost of pet insurance for a dog is $35 per month, according to a Forbes Advisor analysis of pet insurance rates. That includes $5,000 of annual coverage, a $250 deductible and 90% reimbursement level. If you’re not sure if pet insurance is worth it, here’s a scenario to consider: Your dog tears its ACL and needs surgery. The vet bills are $4,000. If you had pet insurance with a $250 deductible and 90% reimbursement level, your out-of-pocket costs would be $375 ($250 deductible + 10% of $3,750 = $375). You can find a good price by comparing pet insurance quotes online or by speaking with an independent insurance agent. Featured Partner Offers1Paw ProtectMaximum annual coverage $5,000, $10,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $5001Paw ProtectCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website2EmbraceMaximum annual coverage $5,000, $10,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $5002EmbraceCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website3SpotMaximum annual coverage $2,500, $3,000, $4,000, $5,000, $7,000, $10,000, $15,000, $20,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $500, $750, $1,0003SpotCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website Was this article helpful? Share your feedback Send feedback to the editorial team Rate this Article ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ Please rate the article Email Please enter valid email address Comments We'd love to hear from you, please enter your comments. Invalid email address Submit Thank You for your feedback! Something went wrong. Please try again later. Recommended Reading Best Pet Insurance Best Cheap Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Wellness Plans For Routine Care Best Pet Insurance For Older Dogs Best Pet Insurance For French Bulldogs Compare Pet Insurance Quotes Best Pet Insurance In Your State Pet Insurance Arizona (AZ) Pet Insurance California (CA) Pet Insurance Florida (FL) Pet Insurance Indiana (IN) Pet Insurance Massachusetts (MA) Pet Insurance New Jersey (NJ) Pet Insurance New York (NY) Pet Insurance Texas (TX) Pet Insurance Utah (UT) Pet Insurance Wisconsin (WI) Our Guides What Does Pet Insurance Cover? How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? How Does Pet Insurance Work? Pet Dental Insurance Explained How To Make A Pet Insurance Claim What Is a Pet Insurance Deductible? What is Pet Insurance Waiting Periods? Does Pet Insurance Cover Spaying and Neutering? What Pet Insurance Covers Cancer Treatment? Pet Insurance That Pays The Vet Directly Exotic Pet Insurance Life Insurance For Pets More In Pet Insurance Read This Next Most Expensive Dog Breeds For Pet Insurance Pet Insurance For Pre-Existing Conditions Pet Insurance for Multi Pets Dog Breed Quiz: What Dog Should I Get? More from Tramadol For Dogs: Safe Dosages And Uses By Meera Pal Contributor How Long Are Cats Pregnant? By Patricia Louis Editor Bordetella Vaccine For Kennel Cough In Dogs By Patricia Louis Editor Parvo In Dogs: Symptoms And Treatments By Jean Marie Bauhaus Contributor 20 Most Popular Dog Breeds (2023) By Aaliyah Pasols Contributor Human Years To Dog Years Calculator By Meera Pal Contributor Information provided on Forbes Advisor is for educational purposes only. Your financial situation is unique and the products and services we review may not be right for your circumstances. We do not offer financial advice, advisory or brokerage services, nor do we recommend or advise individuals or to buy or sell particular stocks or securities. Performance information may have changed since the time of publication. Past performance is not indicative of future results. Forbes Advisor adheres to strict editorial integrity standards. To the best of our knowledge, all content is accurate as of the date posted, though offers contained herein may no longer be available. The opinions expressed are the author’s alone and have not been provided, approved, or otherwise endorsed by our partners. Ashley Kilroy Contributor Ashley is a personal finance writer and content creator. In addition to being a contributing writer at Forbes, she writes for solo entrepreneurs as well as for Fortune 500 companies. Through her financial expertise, she provides millennials and young professionals the tools and resources they need to better manage their finances. © 2023 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved. AdChoices AdChoices Privacy Statement Terms and Conditions About Us Contact Us Careers Coupons Newsroom Forbes Quote of the Day Advertise lorem Are you sure you want to rest your choices? cancel ok The Forbes Advisor editorial team is independent and objective. To help support our reporting work, and to continue our ability to provide this content for free to our readers, we receive compensation from the companies that advertise on the Forbes Advisor site. This compensation comes from two main sources. First, we provide paid placements to advertisers to present their offers. The compensation we receive for those placements affects how and where advertisers’ offers appear on the site. This site does not include all companies or products available within the market. Second, we also include links to advertisers’ offers in some of our articles; these “affiliate links” may generate income for our site when you click on them. The compensation we receive from advertisers does not influence the recommendations or advice our editorial team provides in our articles or otherwise impact any of the editorial content on Forbes Advisor. While we work hard to provide accurate and up to date information that we think you will find relevant, Forbes Advisor does not and cannot guarantee that any information provided is complete and makes no representations or warranties in connection thereto, nor to the accuracy or applicability thereof. Here is a list of our partners who offer products that we have affiliate links for. 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

0Home Online courses [Menu Segment] Accredited Bodies [Menu Segment] Contact Us × Claim Your Discount First Last Your email** Telephone CountryCountryAfghanistanAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican SamoaAndorraAngolaAnguillaAntigua and BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaArubaAustraliaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamas, TheBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBosniaBotswanaBougainvilleBrazilBritish Indian OceanBritish Virgin IslandsBruneiBulgariaBurkina FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCanadaCape Verde IslandsCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChadChileChina, Hong KongChina, MacauChina, People’s RepublicChina, TaiwanColombiaComorosCongo, Democratic Republic ofCongo, Republic ofCook IslandsCosta RicaCote d’IvoireCroatiaCubaCyprusCzech Republic DenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorEgyptEl SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFaeroe IslandsFalkland IslandsFederated States of MicronesiaFijiFinlandFranceFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaGabonGambia, TheGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGibraltarGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuadeloupeGuamGuatemalaGuineaGuinea-BissauGuyanaHaitiHoly See (Vatican City State)HondurasHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqIrelandIsraelItalyJamaicaJapanJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiKorea, Democratic People’s RepKorea, Republic ofKosovoKuwait KyrgyzstanLaosLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacedoniaMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMartiniqueMauritaniaMauritiusMayotteMexicoMoldovaMonacoMongoliaMontenegroMontserratMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNetherlands AntillesNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNorwayOmanPakistanPalestinePanamaPapua New GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPolandPortugalPuerto RicoQatarRéunionRomaniaRussiaRwandaSaint BarthelemySaint Helena Saint Kitts & NevisSaint LuciaSaint MartinSaint Pierre & MiquelonSaint VincentSamoaSan MarinoSao Tomé & PrincipeSaudi ArabiaSenegalSerbiaSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSlovakiaSloveniaSolomon IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth SudanSpainSri LankaSudanSurinameSwazilandSwedenSwitzerlandSyriaTajikistanTanzaniaThailandTimor LesteTogoTokelau IslandsTongaTrinidad & TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTurks & Caicos IslandsTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited KingdomUnited States of AmericaUruguayUS Virgin IslandsUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuelaVietnamWallis & Futuna IslandsYemenZambiaZimbabweCourse Name * Message** I want to stay updated on the latest courses and offers I have read and agreed to Privacy & Policy CommentsThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. × SPEAK TO A COURSE ADVISOR First Last Your email** Telephone CountryCountryAfghanistanAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican SamoaAndorraAngolaAnguillaAntigua and BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaArubaAustraliaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamas, TheBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBosniaBotswanaBougainvilleBrazilBritish Indian OceanBritish Virgin IslandsBruneiBulgariaBurkina FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCanadaCape Verde IslandsCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChadChileChina, Hong KongChina, MacauChina, People’s RepublicChina, TaiwanColombiaComorosCongo, Democratic Republic ofCongo, Republic ofCook IslandsCosta RicaCote d’IvoireCroatiaCubaCyprusCzech Republic DenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorEgyptEl SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFaeroe IslandsFalkland IslandsFederated States of MicronesiaFijiFinlandFranceFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaGabonGambia, TheGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGibraltarGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuadeloupeGuamGuatemalaGuineaGuinea-BissauGuyanaHaitiHoly See (Vatican City State)HondurasHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqIrelandIsraelItalyJamaicaJapanJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiKorea, Democratic People’s RepKorea, Republic ofKosovoKuwait KyrgyzstanLaosLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacedoniaMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMartiniqueMauritaniaMauritiusMayotteMexicoMoldovaMonacoMongoliaMontenegroMontserratMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNetherlands AntillesNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNorwayOmanPakistanPalestinePanamaPapua New GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPolandPortugalPuerto RicoQatarRéunionRomaniaRussiaRwandaSaint BarthelemySaint Helena Saint Kitts & NevisSaint LuciaSaint MartinSaint Pierre & MiquelonSaint VincentSamoaSan MarinoSao Tomé & PrincipeSaudi ArabiaSenegalSerbiaSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSlovakiaSloveniaSolomon IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth SudanSpainSri LankaSudanSurinameSwazilandSwedenSwitzerlandSyriaTajikistanTanzaniaThailandTimor LesteTogoTokelau IslandsTongaTrinidad & TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTurks & Caicos IslandsTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited KingdomUnited States of AmericaUruguayUS Virgin IslandsUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuelaVietnamWallis & Futuna IslandsYemenZambiaZimbabweCourse Name * Message** I want to stay updated on the latest courses and offers I have read and agreed to Privacy & Policy CommentsThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. × Claim Your Discount First Last Your email** Telephone CountryCountryAfghanistanAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican SamoaAndorraAngolaAnguillaAntigua and BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaArubaAustraliaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamas, TheBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBosniaBotswanaBougainvilleBrazilBritish Indian OceanBritish Virgin IslandsBruneiBulgariaBurkina FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCanadaCape Verde IslandsCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChadChileChina, Hong KongChina, MacauChina, People’s RepublicChina, TaiwanColombiaComorosCongo, Democratic Republic ofCongo, Republic ofCook IslandsCosta RicaCote d’IvoireCroatiaCubaCyprusCzech Republic DenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorEgyptEl SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFaeroe IslandsFalkland IslandsFederated States of MicronesiaFijiFinlandFranceFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaGabonGambia, TheGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGibraltarGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuadeloupeGuamGuatemalaGuineaGuinea-BissauGuyanaHaitiHoly See (Vatican City State)HondurasHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqIrelandIsraelItalyJamaicaJapanJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiKorea, Democratic People’s RepKorea, Republic ofKosovoKuwait KyrgyzstanLaosLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacedoniaMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMartiniqueMauritaniaMauritiusMayotteMexicoMoldovaMonacoMongoliaMontenegroMontserratMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNetherlands AntillesNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNorwayOmanPakistanPalestinePanamaPapua New GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPolandPortugalPuerto RicoQatarRéunionRomaniaRussiaRwandaSaint BarthelemySaint Helena Saint Kitts & NevisSaint LuciaSaint MartinSaint Pierre & MiquelonSaint VincentSamoaSan MarinoSao Tomé & PrincipeSaudi ArabiaSenegalSerbiaSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSlovakiaSloveniaSolomon IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth SudanSpainSri LankaSudanSurinameSwazilandSwedenSwitzerlandSyriaTajikistanTanzaniaThailandTimor LesteTogoTokelau IslandsTongaTrinidad & TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTurks & Caicos IslandsTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited KingdomUnited States of AmericaUruguayUS Virgin IslandsUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuelaVietnamWallis & Futuna IslandsYemenZambiaZimbabweCourse Name * Message** I want to stay updated on the latest courses and offers I have read and agreed to Privacy & Policy NameThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Login Sign Up Or Username Password forget password Remember Me Sign in with FacebookSign in with Google Sign in with FacebookSign in with Google HomeOnline coursesVisit All CoursesAccounting & FinanceFinancial AccountingAnimal CareAnimal PsychologyAnimal TrainingPet First AidVeterinary SupportBusiness & ManagementBusiness AdministrationBusiness AnalysisBusiness CommunicationManagementStrategic ManagementEmployability SkillsBeauty & CosmeticsCounsellingEvent OrganisingInterior DecoratingLandscaping and GardeningPlumbing & Pipe FittingsGeneral Maths and StatisticsStatisticsHealth & ChildcareHospitality, Travel & TourismHotel ManagementOpera PMS Software TrainingHR & LeadershipHuman Resource ManagementLeadership TrainingLife LearningCooking & BakingOffice AdministrationCustomer ServicePersonal AssistantReceptionistsSales & MarketingScience, Engineering & LogisticsBiology & ChemistryTeaching and EducationEducational TrainingTeaching AssistantOtherAccredited BodiesQuality Licence SchemePearson BTECNCFE & CACHEATHETQUKContact Us No products in the cart. HomeBlog7 Important Animal Care Tips for Pet Owners 7 Important Animal Care Tips for Pet Owners Do you own a furry friend, or planning on getting one? If you are, then read on to find out important animal care tips that will make an easy and straightforward process. It’s not rocket science. Responsible pet ownership begins with proper animal care tips. When you adopt a furry friend, you must realize that you are making a lifelong dedication to an additional family member. Know that your pet is reliant on you for his or her health and care. The unconditional love and happiness that pets bring to our lives outweigh the additional responsibilities that come with getting a fur baby to your household. Let’s look at the basics that all caring pet owners must be aware of to ensure your pet’s health and well-being are on track. 7 Important Animal Care Tips are as follow: 1. Feed Them Healthy and Nutritious Food Pets, like humans, need food that is tailored to their individual nutritional requirements. Dog diets are made to satisfy the dietary needs of dogs, and cat foods are made to meet the nutritional needs of cats. Importantly, their nutritional requirements are entirely different. Puppies need different types of food and nutrition than older dogs. Special diets may be a necessity for pets with medical conditions. A lot of people tend to feed their pets under the table. However, this cannot be recommended for the health and benefit of your pet. Table scraps are usually not suitable for dogs and cats. Most of the things we consume, such as salt, garlic, and onions, are harmful to your pet’s wellness and cause them to become ill or even die. Don’t forget to feed your pets the required amount of food. Obesity can be caused by overfeeding the pet or giving him too many treats, which can lead to heart failure, kidney problems, and other health issues. To avoid these conditions, it is best to weigh the food when it comes to feeding the pets. Always double-check with the vet if you are unsure of your pet’s dietary requirements. 2. Provide Them With Clean Water Pets, just like people, need continuous access to water in order to stay alive. All pets under your care should have access to a clean, fresh bowl of water. Place it by their food bowl to make it readily available, and try to refill your pet’s water bowl at least twice a day. Your pet will stay healthy, hydrated, and happy with the availability of clean drinking water. If your pet is a fish or turtle, make sure you clean their tanks regularly to avoid the stench that comes with old water. Dirty water could affect the well-being of your pet fish or turtle. 3. Give Them a Cozy and Safe Place to Call Home Cats are often in danger around cars, vicious dogs, and predators, which is why it is important to keep them indoors for their own protection. Most cats enjoy having a covered bed or a cave-like room inside where they can take shelter and feel safe. If you allow your dog off the leash within your fenced yard, make sure he has a microchipped tag and that the microchip is registered with accurate contact details. Always provide clean water, as well as protection and shelter. Dogs love having their own dog bed indoors as well. Make sure you get them a cozy little bed for naps and snoozes. Pets require coverage from extreme heat and cold and other types of adverse weather and should not remain entirely outdoors. Another thing to remember is predators such as coyotes (which are more active at night but can still be seen during the day) see your pets as ideal prey. Protect them from these kinds of predators by following our animal care tips. 4. Pets Have to Attend to Nature’s Call Too It is possible to toilet train several types of pets. It gives them the freedom to wander around the house without having accidents. You should make sure that at least one litter box is provided for cats. During the day, puppies need a potty break every one or two hours. A dog’s ability to hold it for hours varies depending on the age. A three-month-old puppy, for example, requires at least one toilet break every once in four hours. A trainer of yourself can train older dogs to hold, or you can introduce them to the options of doggy doors and potty pads. Wherever your fur baby’s toilet is, make sure you clean it regularly to avoid dirt and bacteria accumulating in them. Hygiene is vital for health and well-being. 5. Make Sure Your Pets Stay Fit Playtime is essential regardless of what kind of pet you get. Let it be a dog, cat, turtle, or gerbil; all animals like to play. This is an essential part of proper pet care, vital for your pet’s physical and mental well-being. Ever had your cat jump in the garbage or dog mess up your sofa? It is not misbehaviour but an indication that your pet is bored. Socialisation can benefit your pet as well. Your puppy or kitten will connect with you and other pets if they learn appropriate socialization skills. 6. Vet Visits Are A Part of Pet Care Regular trips to the vet as necessary are a responsibility of a pet owner. Your dog or cat should get a health check at least once or twice a year due to their shorter life than humans. When your pet is young, they may require to visit the vet more often, depending on their vaccination schedule. However, maintaining and ensuring your pet is healthy means you need to keep up with their vet appointments. It may not be the easiest task to take your pet to the vet. This applies to cats, mainly because they do not like to leave their homes’ comfortable and familiar environment. But there are ways to overcome these challenges. For instance, you can start acclimating your cat to the transporting box from the time they are kittens. Dogs, however, love car rides. Take the dog out in the car a few times, so he doesn’t equate being in the car with driving to the veterinarian. Many pets don’t mind going to the vet, particularly if you select a vet who is an excellent fit for your furry friend. 7. Spay or Neuter Your Pets Sterilization protects your pet from a variety of health issues, including complicated pregnancies. It helps to decrease the number of stray animals on the streets. Research has shown that spaying a female cat can prevent her from going to heat and reduce ovarian cancer risk. Neutering the puppies reduces aggression and their likeliness to wander around the neighborhood. It prevents testicular cancer in the long term as well. Pet parenting is a joyful journey that creates memories along the way. You and your family pet are well on their way to a lifelong journey of happiness if you follow the 7 tips above. If you are interested in animal care courses to be a better care giver to your pet, or if you are looking into animal care jobs training, check out South London College for available options. January 26, 2022 0 responses on "7 Important Animal Care Tips for Pet Owners" Leave a Message Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Never Miss a Post Sign up for free and be the first to be notified about updates. Enter Your Email Here NameThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Related Courses Preview This Course Diploma in Essential Cat and Kitten Care at QLS Level 3 4.5 £149.00 Endorsed by "Quality Licence Scheme"365 Days Buy Now Preview This Course Diploma in Care of the Senior Pets at QLS Level 3 4.5 £149.00 Endorsed by "Quality Licence Scheme"365 Days Buy Now Preview This Course Advanced Diploma in Veterinary Support Assistant at QLS Level 3 4.3 £149.00 Endorsed by "Quality Licence Scheme"365 Days Buy Now Preview This Course Advanced Diploma in Animal Care and Business at QLS Level 3 4.3 £149.00 Endorsed by "Quality Licence Scheme"365 Days Buy Now Preview This Course Advanced Diploma in Animal Care Career at QLS Level 3 4.5 £149.00 Endorsed by "Quality Licence Scheme"365 Days Buy Now Subscribe Our Newsletter Enter Your Email Here PhoneThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. South London College We have established a reputation for delivering excellence in online learning. Top Categories Accounting & Finance Animal Care Employability Skills HR & Leadership Business & Management Project Management Information Technology Teaching and Education View all courses Quick Links About Us Contact Us Terms & Conditions Refund Policy Privacy Policy Blog FAQ Student ID Card Become an Instructor Course Extension Fee Special offers Contact Us Location: 35-37 Ludgate Hill, London, EC4M 7JN, United Kingdom Tel: +4420-8126-0422 Fax: 0203 884 1890 Email: info@southlondoncollege.org Skype: info@southlondoncollege.org Certificate Code English French German Spanish Arabic Hindi top Copyright © Southlondoncollege.org. All rights reserved. 2023, Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy There are lots of successful athletes all around the world that can be encountered at any time best athlete of all time What are the origins of Halloween Monsters, which we celebrate on October 31st every year? What does classic halloween monsters Jermaine Dupri net worth is $2 million. He is a citizen of the USA whose profession is record producer, rapper, and songwriterjermaine dupri net worth 2021 Looking for ideas to look unique and stunning this summer? If yes, then spine tattoos are the perfect pick for you dragon spine tattoos Online shopping sites and online stores are here to stay. Almost everyone and their cousins have used an online store to purchase one item or the other before shopping sites 

Donate: Give Now In Memory or In Honor Planned Giving Urgent Need Toggle navigation Menu Adopt a PetAdoption SearchAdoption Info & FAQsLife at the ShelterShare Your Happy TailGet Pet HelpLost & Found PetsLost/Found SearchCommunity Cats ProgramRehome a PetPet Resource CenterFound KittensPet Food PantryLow-Cost Vet ClinicCat & Dog VaccinesOwner-Requested Humane EuthanasiaShelter Pet Vet CareWays to GiveDonate Now or Give MonthlyUrgent NeedGive in Honor or Memory OfPlanned GivingKennel ClubWish ListOther Ways to GiveThe CARE FundVolunteerAbout VolunteeringVolunteer OpportunitiesFoster a PetFoster SearchWhat's Going OnEvents and PromotionsUrgent NeedBlogNewsCommunity OutreachAbout UsLeadershipFinancial Reports & StatisticsEmploymentPartnersLocation & HoursContact UsJoin Our Email List HomeWhat's Going OnBlogThe Basic Necessities of Proper Pet Care The Basic Necessities of Proper Pet Care Jan 23, 2018 Proper pet care is the basis of responsible pet ownership. It is important when you adopt a pet to understand it is a lifetime commitment to a furry family member that depends on you for his or her health and well-being. Happily, the unconditional love and joy that pets bring to our lives more than makes up for the added responsibility that comes with welcoming adding a furry child to your family. To ensure your pet’s health and happiness, following are the necessities that all responsible pet owners need to provide. Pets need healthy food. Just like people, pets need food that meets their specific nutritional needs. Dog foods are designed to meet a dog’s nutritional needs and cat foods are designed to meet a cat’s nutritional needs. Importantly, their dietary needs are very different. Puppies require different food from senior dogs. Pet’s with health issues may require special diets. Table scraps are typically not good for dogs and cats because many of the foods we eat, such as salt, garlic, and onions are bad for your pet’s health and can make them sick or even be fatal. Don’t forget to give pets the right amount of food, too! Overfeeding your pet or giving him too many treats could lead to obesity, which could consequently trigger more health problems such as heart disease, renal problems, and more. Weigh your options when it comes to pet food to avoid these kinds of illnesses — and if you don’t exactly know what foods are best for your pet, it’s a great idea to ask the opinion of your vet! Give your pets 24/7 access to fresh drinking water. Just like human beings, pets need ready access to water in order to survive. Always provide a clean, fresh bowl of water to all animals in your care. Make it accessible by placing it near their food bowl, and remember to refill your pet’s water bowl at least two times a day. This will keep your pet cool, hydrated, and healthy. If your pet lives in water, like fish and turtles, clean aquariums at least once a week. Failing to do so could lead to smelly tanks and sick pets! Proper pet care includes providing a safe, cozy shelter. Cars, aggressive dogs, and predators are an ongoing threat to cats, which is why they should be kept indoors for their own safety. Many cats enjoy having a covered bed or cocoon-like space inside where they can retreat to and feel safe. If you let your dog out in your fenced-in yard off-leash, be sure he is wearing tags and is microchipped, and that the microchip is registered and your contact information is up-to-date. It is also a good idea to register your pet with Finding Rover. Always provide shade and shelter, along with water. Indoors, dogs also typically enjoy having their own dog bed and older dogs, in particular, may benefit from having an orthopedic bed. Pets need protection from extreme hot and cold temperatures and other extreme weather and shouldn’t be expected to live exclusively outside. Another concern is predators like coyotes (who tend to lurk at night but are often present in the daytime as well) that might consider your pets as suitable prey. Pets need to go to the bathroom regularly. Many types of pets can be housebroken, allowing them the opportunity to roam the house without the worries of accidents. Cats should be provided at least one litter box, Puppies generally need a potty break every one to two hours during the day. A general rule of thumb is that a puppy can hold it for as many hours as she is months old, plus one. For example, a three-month-old puppy, should have at least one bathroom break every four hours. You’ll learn the needs of your own dog but no dog should be expected to “hold it” more than six hours. Senior dogs also need to relieve themselves more frequently, just like older people. Dogs can be taught how to use doggy doors, potty pads, or to wait for walks to relieve themselves. No matter where your pet’s bathroom is, be sure to clean it regularly. Observing proper hygiene and sanitation will prevent dirt and bacteria from piling up and help protect your pet’s health. Your pets will greatly appreciate having a clean area to do their business, too! Make sure that your pet gets regular exercise. Proper pet care also includes exercising your pet. Exercise is an important part of your pet’s mental, as well as physical, health. If you spend any time on social media, you know that all kinds of animals like to play such as this ball-playing turtle, this dog playing fetch by himself or this bird playing with a red cup. What some people consider misbehavior in a pet is just the pet getting bored an amusing itself by getting in the garbage or tearing up the couch or…well you get the idea. Need some suggestions on what to do with your dog? Check out The Animal Foundation’s Guide to Your Dog’s Play Time and Activities. Pets also benefit from socialization, whether that’s regular interaction with you, having guests come over, or trips outside of the house. Expand their horizons and improve their people skills while helping them to safely experience new things! Pets require doctor visits and healthy habits. To ensure that your pets are healthy and nimble, you should take them to a local, trusted veterinarian for wellness check-ups at least once a year. Keeping up on your pet’s vaccinations [LINK: Cat & Dog Vaccines] is essential. Clean teeth and healthy gums also play an important role in your pet’s health. If your furry friend is showing signs or symptoms of being sick, take them to your vet or animal hospital right away to get them feeling better sooner rather than later! Another way to keep your pets healthy and happy is to regularly groom them (if needed). Matted fur can be painful and unhealthy for dogs. Dogs and cats may not like it, but baths, brushings, nail trims, and flea/tick removal may be necessary for your pet’s well-being. With the above tips on proper pet care, you and your beloved pet are well on your way to a lifetime of happiness together! Topics All Pet Activities Pet Care Pet Education Pet Health Pet Safety Pet Training TAF Programs Urgent Need CARE Fund Featured Residents Tags All dog adoption training adopt a dog foster a pet volunteering dog sports dog training minnie urgent need medical donate chihuahua urgent vaccinations parvo care July 4th pet safety lost pets found pets pig giving tuesday turtles dental Long Stay Resident Huskies dfs test dogs Pit Bulls Summer Heat Pet Protection spay and neuter cat & dog vaccines low-cost vet clinic dog breeds exercise low-cost vet cats and dogs cats puppies kittens adopting a pet Las Vegas rabbits pet training Pit Bull Terriers travel food treats cat adoption holidays Share This Blog Donate Help give animals the life they deserve Adopt Save a life today and add to your family Volunteer Help at the clinic or foster some furry friends Low-Cost Clinic Schedule an appointment and find directions here The Animal Foundation at 655 N. Mojave Road in Las Vegas is conveniently located off US-95 and Eastern. The Animal Foundation is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization. All donations are tax deductible in full or in part. Tax ID: 88-0144253. Contact us by phone or email using the contact information found here. Facebook icon Twitter icon Instagram icon Donate Today Donate Now or Give Monthly Urgent Need Give in Honor or Memory Of Planned Giving Kennel Club Wish List Other Ways to Give Donate Now or Give Monthly Give in Honor or Memory Of The CARE Fund Where To? Adopt a Pet Get Pet Help Low-Cost Vet Clinic Ways to Give Volunteer What's Going On About Us Hours of Operation Adoptions Tuesday - Sunday 11am - 7pm Lost & Found Tuesday - Sunday 11am - 7pm Low-Cost Vaccine Clinic By Appointment Only Spay & Neuter Temporarily Closed The Animal Foundation is a proud recipient of funding from Dave & Cheryl Duffield Foundation. Copyright © 2023 Animal Foundation. All Rights Reserved. Web Application by Informatics, Inc. 172.26.15.108 The Animal Foundation's public Low-Cost Vet Clinic does not perform spay and neuter surgery on English Bulldogs, Pugs, or French Bulldogs. Please contact a full service veterinary hospital for further assistance. Close 

Skip to content Call Us Today! 770-438-2694|animalcare3000@gmail.com FacebookTwitterLinkedInYouTubeYelp HomeAboutMeet The TeamFor PatientsOur ServicesGroomingInternal MedicinePreventative CareSurgical CarePet BoardingBlogContact View Larger Image Essential Pet Care Tips and Tricks for Cats and Dogs Caring for a pet is a rewarding but often time-consuming experience. Whether it’s a K9 companion or a dear feline friend, there are certain things that you must do to ensure your pet’s well-being. From providing proper nutrition to scheduling regular vet visits, here are some essential pet care tips and tricks that pet lovers should know. Here at Animal Care Center, we want the very best for your pet. Here are some essential pet care tips for a healthy and happy cat or dog. Pay Attention to Proper Nutrition Proper nutrition is a must to keep your pet in good health. Knowing what type of food to feed your pet is the first step. Many pets will do well with a mix of dry and wet food, but some may require a special diet. Talk to your vet to determine what type of food your pet needs. Be mindful of the amount of food you give them, sticking to the feeding instructions provided by the food’s manufacturer. Providing proper nutrition for your pet is essential for their health and well-being. Here are some tips for easy and healthy pet nutrition that pet owners can use: Feed your pet the correct amount of food. Overfeeding can result in pet obesity, which brings a myriad of health issues with it. Provide a balanced diet. Different types of pets require different types of food, so make sure you know what type of food your pet needs. Many pets will do well with a mix of wet and dry food, but some may require a special diet. See your veterinarian for custom advice. Avoid unhealthy snacks. It may be tempting to give your pet unhealthy treats, but they should only be given in moderation. If you do give your pet treats, make sure they are natural and healthy. Make sure your pet has access to fresh water. Always make sure your pet has access to fresh, clean water. Replace their water daily. Avoid human food. Human food is not always suitable for pets and can be dangerous, so it is best to avoid it. If you are unsure if a food you’re giving your pet is harmful, please contact us before feeding it to your cat or dog. By following these tips, pet owners can ensure that their pet is getting the nutrition they need to stay healthy and happy. Exercise is Excellent for Heart Health and More Exercise is essential for all pets, as it helps keep them healthy and fit. You can take your pet for walks or let them run and play in a fenced-in area. If you have a dog, sign them up for a training class to help them learn obedience and socialization. Meanwhile, exercise also helps to keep your pet mentally stimulated and can help to reduce destructive behaviors. Exercise is an important part of pet care. Physical activity helps keep your pet healthy and fit. Here are some tips and tricks to help with dog and cat exercise for a healthy life: Take your pet for regular walks. Regular walks are a great way for your pet to stay active and get the exercise they need. Make sure you take your pet for at least one walk per day, or more if you can. Play interactive games. Playing interactive games with your pet is a great way to keep them active. Try tossing a ball or playing hide and seek with your pet. Schedule playtime. Set aside some time on a daily basis to play with your pet. This will help keep them active and give them an outlet for their energy. Set up an obstacle course. For dogs, set up an obstacle course in your yard or in an enclosed area. This will challenge your pet and help them stay active. Visit a dog park. Dog parks are great places for your pet to run, play, and socialize with other pets. Just be sure to obey all the park rules and to keep your pet on a leash. While these tips are mostly for dogs, it’s possible to exercise your pet cat. Exercise Ideas for Cats One idea is to use interactive toys such as feathers on a stick or laser pointers. These toys can keep your cat entertained and active. You can also create a play area with tunnels and scratching posts. This will encourage your cat to run, climb and jump. Another idea is to try food puzzles or treat toys. Lastly, you can take your cat outside for a walk on a leash or let them play in a secure outdoor enclosure. This will give them a chance to explore and stretch their legs. Pet Care Tips: Grooming Grooming pets is an important part of pet care, as it helps to keep them healthy and looking their best. Furthermore, Grooming helps to keep your pet’s coat and skin free of dirt, debris, and parasites. Regular brushing and combing helps to remove mats and tangles, as well as to distribute natural oils throughout the coat. This helps to keep the coat healthy and looking shiny. You’ll also need to keep your pet’s nails trim and their teeth clean. Here are some easy and helpful grooming tips for dogs and cats that pet owners can use: Brush your pet regularly. Brushing your pet regularly is important to help keep their coat healthy and free of tangles and mats. Make sure to use the correct brush for your pet’s breed and coat type. Check your pet’s nails. Check your pet’s nails regularly, and trim them if they’re too long. If you’re not comfortable doing this yourself, you can take your pet to a professional groomer. Brush your pet’s teeth. Brushing your pet’s teeth is important for their oral hygiene. Use pet-specific toothpaste and brush your pet’s teeth every day if possible. Clean your pet’s ears. Clean your pet’s ears regularly to help remove dirt, wax, and debris. If your pet has long fur, make sure to trim it to help keep their ears clean. Give your pet a bath. Give your pet a bath every few weeks to help keep their skin and coat healthy and free of dirt and odors. Make sure to use pet-specific shampoo and conditioner. Keep up on Vet Visits and Vaccinations As a pet owner, it is your responsibility to ensure the health and wellbeing of your furry companion. Regular visits to the vet and vaccines are crucial in keeping your cat or dog healthy and happy. Just like humans, pets can suffer from a range of illnesses and diseases that may not be immediately visible. During a routine check-up, your vet can examine your pet for any signs of illness and recommend any necessary treatment. This can prevent a minor issue from developing into a more serious health problem, increasing the chances of a full recovery. The Importance of Annual Pet Vaccines Vaccines are an important part of a pet’s healthcare routine. They help protect your pet from a range of diseases, some of which can be fatal. Vaccines work by stimulating the immune system to produce antibodies, which can fight off the disease if your pet comes into contact with it. Many vaccines require booster shots to maintain immunity, so it is crucial to keep up with your pet’s vaccination schedule to ensure maximum protection. These are some vaccines you might want to consider for your pet, in guidance from your veterinarian: Canine Distemper Virus Vaccine Canine Adenovirus Type 2 Vaccine Canine Parvovirus Vaccine Canine Parainfluenza Virus Vaccine Rabies Vaccine Leptospirosis Vaccine Bordetella Bronchiseptica Vaccine Lyme Disease Vaccine Pet Vaccines for Cats: Feline Panleukopenia Vaccine Feline Calicivirus Vaccine Feline Herpesvirus Vaccine Rabies Vaccine Feline Leukemia Virus Vaccine Chlamydia Psittaci Vaccine It is important to note that not all pets require all of these vaccines. The type and number of vaccines will depend on factors such as age, lifestyle, and health status. It is recommended to consult with your veterinarian to determine the appropriate vaccination schedule for your pet. Schedule Your Vet Visit with Animal Care Center In conclusion, regular vet visits and vaccines are essential for keeping your pet healthy and happy. They can help prevent health issues from developing and ensure that your pet receives the best possible care. As a responsible pet owner, it is important to prioritize these practices and make them a regular part of your pet’s health care routine. If you have questions or need more pet care tips, please contact Animal Care Center today. Hooked Marketing2023-03-08T18:36:19+00:00 Share This Post FacebookTwitterLinkedInPinterest Related Posts Fall Pet Safety: Navigating Common Hazards to Keep Our Furry Friends Secure Gallery How to Find the Perfect Pet Sitter (or Try Dog Boarding Instead!) Gallery National Dog Walker Appreciation Day: How a Walk with Your Pup Can Brighten Your Day Gallery The Benefits of Pets for School-Aged Children Gallery Beach Safety for Dogs: How to Safely Enjoy the Sand and Surf with Your Furry Friends Gallery Ready to schedule an appointment? Contact Info 4188 S Cobb Dr SE, Smyrna, GA 30080 Phone: 770-438-2694 Email: animalcare3000@gmail.com Recent Blog Posts Fall Pet Safety: Navigating Common Hazards to Keep Our Furry Friends Secure How to Find the Perfect Pet Sitter (or Try Dog Boarding Instead!) Contact info animalcare3000@gmail.com (770) 438-2694 4188 S Cobb Dr SE, Smyrna, GA 30080 Opening hours Monday: 8:00 AM - 5:00 PM Tuesday: 8:00 AM - 5:00 PM Wednesday: 8:00 AM - 12:00 PM Thursday: 8:00 AM - 5:00 PM Friday: 8:00 AM - 5:00 PM Saturday: 9:00 AM - 12:00 PM Sunday: Closed Our Location Animal Care Center Copyright Website & Marketing by Hooked Marketing FacebookTwitterLinkedInYouTubeYelp Page load link Go to Top 

Skip to Main Content Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Menu Find a pet Main menuFind a pet Find a pet Rehome a pet Rehome a pet How to rehome Rehome a horse Rehome a horse How to rehome a horse Foster an animal Foster an animal Horse fostering Advice for adopters Advice for adopters Advice and welfare Main menuAdvice and welfare Advice and welfare Pets Pets Dogs Cats Rabbits Horses Rodents Ferrets Exotic pets Ornamental Fish General Giving up a pet Pet bereavement Find or call a vet Pet theft Brachycephalic animals Lost and found Lab animals Lab animals Phasing out Are animal experiments necessary? Testing chemicals Medicines and vaccines Replacing research animals Reducing research animal suffering Primates and research Biotechnology Farm animals Farm animals Farm animals as pets Slaughter On-farm Live transport Pigs Laying hens Sheep Farmed fish Meat chickens Ducks Dairy cows Beef cattle Turkeys Farmed rabbits Foie Gras Worried about a farm animal? Bovine TB Litter Litter Fishing litter Alternatives to balloons and sky lanterns Single use plastics Sky lanterns Seasonal advice Seasonal advice Spring Summer Autumn Winter Floods Pets at Christmas Diseases Diseases Alabama rot Performing animals Performing animals Guidelines Report concerns FAQs The cost-of-living crisis The cost-of-living crisis Pet cost calculator Food bank Food bank donation point Dog behaviour care costs Wildlife friendly gardening Wildlife friendly gardening The RSPCA wildlife garden Wildlife Wildlife Foxes Squirrels Hedgehogs Otters Seals Bats Rats and mice Rabbits and Hares Find a wildlife rescue centre Wildlife deterrents Injured wild animals Badgers Snakes Deer Wildlife in captivity Wildlife laws Get involved Main menuGet involved Get involved Volunteer Volunteer What can I do? What's it like to volunteer with us? Volunteers' week Big Help Out Campaign Campaign Puppy trade Stun before slaughter Primates as pets Sentient beings Circuses Sanctuaries Farm Animals Better chicken Tougher sentencing Make Wales kinder for animals I'm a Celebrity Stop live exports Animal rehoming Fur Free Britain Gene editing Pets as prizes End the cage age Lab animal regulations Save our breath Join our campaign network Achievements Phase Out Lab Animals Fireworks Slaughterhouses Rabbit breeding End Sky Litter Ear cropping Vapes Better labels better choices End Breed Specific Legislation Act now for animals Donate Donate Leaving a legacy Current appeals Donate in memory Advice for donors Payroll Giving Unwanted items Gift Aid Sponsorship Philanthropy Win Win Raffle Lottery Fundraise Fundraise Virtual challenges At school Animal Hero Running Trekking Cycling Training hub Own place in an event Ideas and resources Fundraising pack Pay in your offline fundraising Swimming My Big Walkies #50MilesForAnimals Young people Young people Subscription Renewal Buttercup Farm 30DaysForAnimals Membership Membership Membership policy statement Events Events Local events One Fun Day Christmas Concert Howloween Great British Spring Clean Businesses Businesses Become a partner Our corporate partners Other ways companies can support What we do Main menuWhat we do What we do Strategy to 2030 Strategy to 2030 Getting justice for animals Ambitions End cruelty End cruelty Investigate cruelty Rescue animals Prevent suffering Prosecution Change the law Work internationally Care for animals Care for animals Rehabilitation Release Our wildlife centres Veterinary care Home for Life Financial assistance Education Education Children in school Young offenders At home Latest Latest News Our blog Publications The Dog Rescuers Jo Brand's Kitten Rescue Media contacts Adoptober RSPCA 2022 essay collection Animal Kindness Index 2022 Wilberforce Lecture Facts, figures and myths Who we are Who we are Governance Our branches Our executives High profile supporters Our history How we work How we work Our mission Policies RSPCA's rules Shop Main menuShop Shop Pet friendly holidays Pet friendly holidays Shop and donate Shop and donate Pet insurance Pet insurance Cat insurance Dog insurance Rabbit insurance Multi-pet insurance Product information FAQs Make a claim My RSPCA Main menu My RSPCA My account My account My pets My pets Sign in Sign in Your local RSPCA Your local RSPCA Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Share this... Caring for your dog Expert information on the needs of dogs, plus advice about how to be #DogKind and keep dogs healthy. Fish Owning aquarium fish can be rewarding but it's a big responsibility. Pet care advice Check out our general pet pages to keep your pet bright-eyed and bushy-tailed! Caring for cats and kittens Expert information on cat biology, behaviour and advice about how to keep cats healthy and happy. Ferrets Learn more about ferret behaviour and get expert advice on how to keep ferrets happy and healthy Pet bereavement Saying goodbye can be an extremely tough and emotional time. Read our support. Rabbits Learn about rabbit biology, behaviour with expert advice on how to keep rabbits healthy & happy. Caring for reptiles and other exotic pets Caring for reptiles and other exotic pets. Giving up a pet Find out what you should do if you need to rehome a pet you are unable to care for. Caring for horses and ponies Get expert advice on how to keep horses and ponies healthy and happy. Pet rodents Find out what different pet rodents need to keep them healthy and happy. Find or call a vet Need to register your pet with a veterinary practice or call a vet for emergency advice? Hidden How we help In 2022 we investigated and closed 63,563 complaints of animal cruelty Get in touch Find your local RSPCA Contact us Report cruelty Our charity Media centre Science RSPCA Assured Education Follow us Or sign up for email updates © RSPCA 2023. All rights reserved. The RSPCA helps animals in England and Wales. Registered charity no.219099. Terms and conditions Site map National privacy notice Accessibility Modern slavery Contact us Jobs 

 

Select Region United States United Kingdom Germany India Australia Italy Canada Credit Cards Credit Cards Credit Cards Compare Credit Cards Best Credit Cards 2023 Credit Card Comparison Best Travel Credit Cards Best Cash Back Credit Cards Best 0% APR Credit Cards Best Balance Transfer Credit Cards Best Rewards Credit Cards Best Airline Credit Cards Best Credit Cards for International Travel Best Credit Cards For Bad Credit Best Student Credit Cards Best Secured Credit Cards Best First Credit Cards Best Credit Cards For No Credit Best Gas Credit Cards Compare Business Cards Best Business Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards For Travel Best Cash Back Business Credit Cards Best 0% APR Business Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards For Startups Credit Card Reviews Capital One Venture X Chase Sapphire Preferred American Express Platinum Chase Sapphire Reserve American Express Gold Wells Fargo Active Cash More Credit Card Reviews Credit Cards By Issuer Best Wells Fargo Credit Cards Best American Express Credit Cards Best Chase Credit Cards Best Capital One Credit Cards Best Discover Credit cards Calculators Credit Card Interest Calculator Balance Transfer Calculator Credit Card Payoff Calculator Credit Score Best Credit Monitoring Services How To Check Your Credit Score What Is A Good Credit Score Credit Repair Best Credit Repair Companies How To Fix Your Credit In 7 Easy Steps How Much Does Credit Repair Cost? Loans Loans Loans Personal Loans Best Personal Loans Personal Loan Rates Compare Personal Loans Best Debt Consolidation Loans Best Low-Interest Personal Loans Best Personal Loans For Fair Credit Best Bad Credit Loans Best Joint Personal Loans Easiest Personal Loans Best Wedding Loans Best Personal Loans For Veterans Student Loans Best Student Loan Refinance Lenders Best Student Loans Best Parent Loan For College Best Low-Interest Student Loans Best Graduate Student Loans Best Medical School Loans Lenders To Refinance Parent PLUS Loans Student Loan Forgiveness FAQ Student Loan Forgiveness Programs Student Loan Calculator Student Loan Refinance Calculator Business Loans Best Business Loans Best Business Lines Of Credit Best Working Capital Loans Best Unsecured Business Loans Best Same-Day Business Loans Best Startup Business Loans Best Business Loans For Bad Credit Fast Approval Business Loans Business Loan Calculator Auto Loans Auto Loan Rates Auto Loan Refinancing Rates Auto Loan Refinancing Lenders Mortgages Mortgages Mortgages Home Buying & Refinancing Best Mortgage Lenders Best Mortgage Refinance Lenders Best Online Mortgage Lenders Best VA Mortgage Lenders Best USDA Mortgage Lenders Best Mortgage Lenders for FHA Loans When Should You Refinance? Mortgage Rates Today's Mortgage Rates Current Mortgage Rates: Compare Today’s Rates Today's Mortgage Refinance Rates Current Mortgage Refinance Rates 30 Year Mortgage Rates 15 Year Mortgage Rates 10 Year Mortgage Rates Today’s VA Mortgage Rates Today’s VA Refinance Rates Historical Mortgage Rates Home Equity Loans Best Home Equity Loan Lenders Best Home Equity Loan Rates Home Equity Loan Calculator Best HELOC Lenders Best HELOC Rates Calculators Mortgage Amortization Calculator Mortgage APR Calculator Cash-Out Refinance Calculator Mortgage Refinance Calculator Mortgage Calculator HELOC Calculator Real Estate How Much House Can I Afford? Calculator Cost of Living Calculator Housing Market Predictions Most Affordable Cities To Buy A Home Insurance Insurance Insurance Car Insurance Best Car Insurance Cheap Car Insurance Online Car Insurance Quotes Car Insurance Calculator Cost Of Car Insurance Best Car Insurance In Florida Best Car Insurance In California Best Car Insurance In Texas Travel Insurance Best Travel Insurance Best Covid Travel Insurance Best Cruise Travel Insurance Cancel For Any Reason Insurance How Much Is Travel Insurance? Cheap Travel Insurance Travel Insurance & Destinations Life Insurance Best Life Insurance Best Term Life Insurance Best Senior Life Insurance No-Exam Life Insurance Compare Life Insurance Quotes How Much Is Life Insurance? Cheap Life Insurance Life Insurance Calculator Homeowners Insurance Best Home Insurance Companies Compare Home Insurance Quotes Home Insurance Calculator Average Cost Of Homeowners Insurance How Much Home Insurance Do I Need? Renters Insurance Best Renters Insurance Cheap Renters Insurance How Much Is Renters Insurance? Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Pet Insurance Quotes: Compare and Save Is Pet Insurance Worth It In 2023? Cheap Pet Insurance How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? Pet Insurance Pre-Existing Conditions Health Insurance Best Health Insurance Companies Short-Term Health Insurance Best Disability Insurance Health Insurance for Small Business Best Dental Insurance Companies Best Vision Insurance Companies Business Insurance Best Small Business Insurance Commercial Auto Insurance General Liability Insurance Cyber Liability Insurance Business Interruption Insurance Banking Banking Banking Best Banks Best Banks Best Online Banks Best Credit Unions Best Budget Apps Bank Promotions & Bonuses Best Bank Bonuses & Promotions Capital One Promotions Chase Promotions Wells Fargo Checking Account Bonus Bank Of America Promotions US Bank Promotions CDs Best CD Rates CD Rates Today CD Interest Rates Forecast 3 Month CD Rates 6 Month CD Rates 1 Year CD Rates 3 Year CD Rates 5 Year CD Rates 10 Year CD Rates No Penalty CD Rates Jumbo CD Rates Savings Best Savings Accounts Best High Yield Savings Accounts Best Savings Accounts For Kids Best Business Savings Accounts Best Money Market Accounts Checking Best Checking Accounts Best High Yield Checking Accounts Best Teen Checking Accounts Best Student Checking Accounts Best No Fee Checking Accounts Best Business Checking Accounts Taxes Best Tax Software Best Tax Apps Tax Relief Services Tax Brackets 2023 Income Tax Calculator Paycheck Calculator Money Transfer International Money Transfer Currency Calculator Investing Investing Investing Investing Basics Best Online Brokers Best Online Brokers For Day Trading Best Investment Apps Best Investment Management Apps Best Robo Advisors Gold Price Today Best Gold IRA Companies Wealth Financial Advisors Wealth Advisors Wealth Management Financial Planner Small Business Small Business Small Business Forming A Business Best LLC Services Best Registered Agent Services How to Start an LLC Cost to Form an LLC HR & Payroll Best Payroll Services Best HR Software Best PEO Services Best Recruiting Software Web Design & Hosting Best Website Builder Best Web Hosting Services Best Blogging Platforms Best Web Hosting Services VoIP & Communication Best VoIP Services Best Cheap VoIP Services Best Business Cell Phone Plans How to Get a Free Business Phone Number Project Management Best Project Management Software Best Free Project Management Software Best Gantt Chart Software Privacy & Security Best VPNs Best Cheap VPN Best Antivirus Software Best Password Managers Legal Legal Legal Find A Lawyer Best Personal Injury Lawyers Best Car Accident Lawyers Best Truck Accident Lawyers Best Motorcycle Accident Lawyers Legal Services Best Online Divorce Services Best Trademark Registration Services Best Name Change Services Best Prepaid Legal Services USA UK DE IN AU IT CA USA | Change Region Back to Forbes.com USA UK DE IN AU IT CA USA | Change Region You might be using an unsupported or outdated browser. To get the best possible experience please use the latest version of Chrome, Firefox, Safari, or Microsoft Edge to view this website. advisor Pet Insurance Advertiser Disclosure 25 Dog Care Tips For Pet Parents Ashley KilroyContributorAshley is a personal finance writer and content creator. In addition to being a contributing writer at Forbes, she writes for solo entrepreneurs as well as for Fortune 500 companies. Through her financial expertise, she provides millennials and young professionals the tools and resources they need to better manage their finances.Ashley Kilroy Ashley KilroyContributorAshley is a personal finance writer and content creator. In addition to being a contributing writer at Forbes, she writes for solo entrepreneurs as well as for Fortune 500 companies. Through her financial expertise, she provides millennials and young professionals the tools and resources they need to better manage their finances.Contributor Jason MetzeditorJason Metz is a writer who has worked in the insurance industry since 2007. As a former claims handler and fraud investigator, he’s seen a lot, and enjoys helping others navigate the complexities and opaqueness of insurance. He has a B.S. in Criminal Justice from Kutztown University and an M.F.A. in Creative Writing from the University of California Riverside, Palm Desert.Fact CheckedJason MetzJason MetzeditorJason Metz is a writer who has worked in the insurance industry since 2007. As a former claims handler and fraud investigator, he’s seen a lot, and enjoys helping others navigate the complexities and opaqueness of insurance. He has a B.S. in Criminal Justice from Kutztown University and an M.F.A. in Creative Writing from the University of California Riverside, Palm Desert.editorFact CheckedUpdated: Oct 3, 2022, 8:21am Editorial Note: We earn a commission from partner links on Forbes Advisor. Commissions do not affect our editors' opinions or evaluations. Getty As a dog owner, you may adore your pooch as if it were your own flesh and blood. And just like your children, you want to ensure you provide the best care possible so your dog can live a happy and healthy life. If you’re striving to be an excellent pet parent, here are some dog care tips to help you along the way. Is Your Dog Covered? Get Peace of Mind With the Best Pet Insurance of 2023 Learn More Meet Your Dog’s Basic Needs As a dog owner, it’s essential to understand and meet your pet’s basic needs. Whether you’re a novice pet parent or an expert, you’ll need to set the stage for your new pup. Your dog’s basic needs will consist of nutritious food, water, treats, toys and bedding to make the pup feel right at home. When you bring a new dog into your home, it’s best to make a trip to the vet as soon as possible. Your vet can help you pinpoint the right type and the amount of food and other important things you need to know about caring for your new friend. Monitor food consumption More than one-third (34%) of dogs were diagnosed as obese, according to the most recent data from Banfield Pet Hospital, which has more than 1,000 veterinary hospitals in 42 states. That’s a 108% increase from 2011 to 2020. Unfortunately, overweight canines are susceptible to many health risks such as metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease or poor immune systems. While you may want to spoil your pet, avoid spoiling them with food. Provide sufficient water throughout the day All dogs need to have clean and fresh water available at all times of the day. Make sure to replenish the water and wash all food and water dishes so they don’t hold bacteria. Regularly groom your dog Regularly grooming your pet ensures they are clean and pest-free. While some dogs only need a bath every few months, others need regular grooming. If your dog sheds, you’ll want to brush it often. Nail trimming is also a must. Neglecting to trim your dog’s nails can cause health problems such as injured tendons and deformed feet. Maintain Your Dog’s Health with Routine Care Proactively tending to your pet’s well-being and health care ensures it lives the very best and healthiest life possible. If you have pet insurance, you can usually offset the cost of routine care by adding a wellness package to your plan. For example, the average cost of a vet office visit is about $61, according to a Forbes Advisor analysis of veterinarian costs, while the average cost for a series of vaccinations (bivalent influenza, bordetella, DAPP, leptospirosis, Lyme disease and rabies) costs about $202. Schedule annual check-ups with your vet One of the best ways to keep your pet healthy is to visit the vet regularly so they can examine your dog for any health concerns. Look for solutions for flea, tick and heartworm prevention Fleas and ticks put you and your pet’s health at risk since they can transmit diseases like Lyme disease, plague and Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Heartworms can cause damage to your dog’s arteries, heart and lungs. Talk to your veterinarian about preventative measures, such as topical and oral medications. Maintain proper vaccinations Vaccinations help protect your dog’s body from invasive diseases. Standard canine vaccines usually include parvovirus, distemper, rabies and canine hepatitis. If you groom or board your pooch, you may also need a vaccine against Bordetella bronchiseptica, which can cause kennel cough. Your vet can help pinpoint the vaccines appropriate for your hound. Consider spaying or neutering your pet Spaying and neutering pets isn’t just about population control—it can help protect your canine companion from certain diseases. For example, spaying your female dog can decrease her chances of uterus infections and breast tumors. Neutering male dogs can protect them from testicular cancer and prostate concerns. Brush your dog’s teeth While often overlooked, dental care is also essential for maintaining your pet’s health. Regularly brushing your pup’s teeth can help prevent dental illnesses that can end up affecting your dog’s kidney and liver function. Dental cleaning might also be recommended, but it can cost a few hundred dollars to $1,000, depending on your location. Some pet insurance companies, such as Lemonade pet insurance, sell add-ons to help offset the cost of dental care, including routine dental cleanings. Related: Pet dental insurance explained Stimulate Your Dog’s Brain and Body A balance of physical and mental stimulation plays a significant role in your dog’s health. It can also encourage good behavior while discouraging harmful behaviors that can wreak havoc on your patience and home. As the saying goes: A tired dog is a good dog. Exercise your dog every day Regular exercise promotes bone, joint, muscle and organ health. Walking can also eliminate boredom and provide mental stimulation. You can also create an exercise routine with your pet, such as climbing stairs, going for a hike or running around the backyard. While different sizes and breeds of dogs require varying levels of exercise, creating an exercise routine with your four-legged friend is essential. Challenge your dog’s brain Man’s best friend benefits from mental stimulation. Teach your dog new tricks, play new games and create puzzles. Since dogs have a heightened sense of smell, they love using their nose to explore. Try scattering a few treats around the home for your dog to find. Create a slow-pace mealtime Some dogs love gobbling up their food in one gulp. But eating too quickly may create digestive issues or result in vomiting. Slow down your dog’s eating habits. Consider a puzzle feeder at mealtime or place a tennis ball in their food bowl so they have to eat around it. Keep Your Pet Safe Dangers are lurking inside and outside of your home that could cause harm to your pooch. Here are some tips for keeping your dog safe and out of trouble. Register your pup State and local pet laws often require dog owners to register their pets. Check your local municipalities so you can ensure your dog is properly licensed. You’ll want to attach the license to its collar to prove your dog is registered if it gets lost. Consider a microchip If your dog becomes lost, a microchip can help you locate your pet. Microchips are painless to implant and contain your contact information. They can usually be scanned at animal shelters and veterinary offices. Some pet insurance plans cover the cost of microchipping. Secure trash, chemicals and toxins around your home Dogs are curious creatures, but sometimes their curiosity can put them at risk of injury or illness—especially when exploring your home. To keep your dog out of harm’s way, secure your trash, toxins and other chemicals found around the house. Create a safe space for your dog Dogs can feel anxious or stressed under certain situations, like the sound of thunder or noisy houseguests. Creating a safe space for your pet can provide comfort and security when it needs to retreat. Have a place in your home with some creature comforts such as a bed, blanket, toys and fresh water. Clean your dog’s stuff Washing your dog’s toys, blankets and bedding removes germs, dirt, pollen and other things that can irritate your pet. Some dogs suffer from seasonal allergies, so make sure you wash your dog’s bedding on a regular basis. Keep food out of your dog’s reach Food items such as avocados, chocolate and onions are toxic to dogs. Keeping these items out of their reach can help avoid some serious health consequences. Generally, you shouldn’t give your pup “people food” like your leftovers. But some “people food” items such as plain chicken, plain rice and canned pumpkin might be recommended by your vet for specific problems, like digestive issues. Use a leash while in public By always using a leash in public places, you can help your pet avoid accidents and injuries. For example, if your dog spots a squirrel and bolts after it, your dog could be at risk of getting hit by a car. Train and Bond with Your Dog to Strengthen Your Relationship Bonding and training your dog go hand-in-hand. By doing both, you are building a relationship of respect, communication and companionship. Prioritize one-on-one time with your pup Dogs flourish on love and affection from their owners. Prioritizing daily interactions with your pet strengthens your bond. You can do so by petting, playing and giving your dog treats. Practice patience and consistency Training a dog takes a lot of patience and consistency. Dogs can sense negative energy, so if they feel as though you’re angry or agitated, they may not perform as well. If you’re struggling to train your dog, consult with a professional or ask your vet for guidance. Remember, training your pup won’t happen overnight, so stick with it—the results are worth it. Consider positive reinforcement training Practicing positive reinforcement training means you reward your pet for good behaviors and ignore the bad. This training method builds your dog’s confidence, encourages cooperation and increases tolerance. On top of that, it can bolster your bond with your canine. Seasonal Care Tips Varying temperatures and weather conditions can impact how to care for your furry confidant. Here are some tips to keep in mind whether it’s winter, spring, summer or fall. Monitor your pet’s time outside In the winter, frigid temperatures can cause frostbite on your dog’s ears, paws and tail. In the summer months, heat can dehydrate your pup and cause heat stroke. Make sure you keep an eye on the weather and limit your dog’s time outside in extreme weather. Related: How To Keep Pets Safe During Extreme Summer Heat Waves Pay close attention to your dog’s paws In the winter months, salt and ice can contribute to cracks in the pads of your pet’s feet. While in the summer months, hot asphalt or concrete can create burns and cause pain. Consider using booties to protect your dog’s paws, or try walking in the grass. Related: Why Do Dogs Eat Grass? Steer clear of toxic algae When hiking, walking or simply venturing around your property, a run-in with water containing toxic algae can make your dog very sick. Check your local Parks and Recreation department to identify bodies of water that could contain harmful bacteria or toxins that may cause harm to your dog. Avoid leaving your pet in a hot car Never leave your dog unsupervised in the car. Even if you think the weather outside is comfortable, temperatures can quickly reach dangerous levels, putting your dog at risk for serious illness or death. The temperature inside your car can increase by 20 degrees in just 10 minutes, according to the American Veterinary Medical Association. Plan for Unexpected Vet Bills with Pet Insurance Even with the best planning and preventive measures, unexpected accidents and illnesses can still happen, which can result in major vet bills. For example, your dog might tear its cruciate ligament while chasing a ball or it might get sick with a serious illness such as cancer. A good way to help offset vet bills is with pet insurance. And it may be more affordable than you think. The average cost of pet insurance for a dog is $35 per month, according to a Forbes Advisor analysis of pet insurance rates. That includes $5,000 of annual coverage, a $250 deductible and 90% reimbursement level. If you’re not sure if pet insurance is worth it, here’s a scenario to consider: Your dog tears its ACL and needs surgery. The vet bills are $4,000. If you had pet insurance with a $250 deductible and 90% reimbursement level, your out-of-pocket costs would be $375 ($250 deductible + 10% of $3,750 = $375). You can find a good price by comparing pet insurance quotes online or by speaking with an independent insurance agent. Featured Partner Offers1Paw ProtectMaximum annual coverage $5,000, $10,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $5001Paw ProtectCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website2EmbraceMaximum annual coverage $5,000, $10,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $5002EmbraceCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website3SpotMaximum annual coverage $2,500, $3,000, $4,000, $5,000, $7,000, $10,000, $15,000, $20,000, UnlimitedReimbursement choices 70%, 80%, 90%Deductible choices $100, $250, $500, $750, $1,0003SpotCompare Plans Via PetInsurer.com's Secure Website Was this article helpful? Share your feedback Send feedback to the editorial team Rate this Article ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ Please rate the article Email Please enter valid email address Comments We'd love to hear from you, please enter your comments. Invalid email address Submit Thank You for your feedback! Something went wrong. Please try again later. Recommended Reading Best Pet Insurance Best Cheap Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance Wellness Plans For Routine Care Best Pet Insurance For Older Dogs Best Pet Insurance For French Bulldogs Compare Pet Insurance Quotes Best Pet Insurance In Your State Pet Insurance Arizona (AZ) Pet Insurance California (CA) Pet Insurance Florida (FL) Pet Insurance Indiana (IN) Pet Insurance Massachusetts (MA) Pet Insurance New Jersey (NJ) Pet Insurance New York (NY) Pet Insurance Texas (TX) Pet Insurance Utah (UT) Pet Insurance Wisconsin (WI) Our Guides What Does Pet Insurance Cover? How Much Does Pet Insurance Cost? How Does Pet Insurance Work? Pet Dental Insurance Explained How To Make A Pet Insurance Claim What Is a Pet Insurance Deductible? What is Pet Insurance Waiting Periods? Does Pet Insurance Cover Spaying and Neutering? What Pet Insurance Covers Cancer Treatment? Pet Insurance That Pays The Vet Directly Exotic Pet Insurance Life Insurance For Pets More In Pet Insurance Read This Next Most Expensive Dog Breeds For Pet Insurance Pet Insurance For Pre-Existing Conditions Pet Insurance for Multi Pets Dog Breed Quiz: What Dog Should I Get? More from Tramadol For Dogs: Safe Dosages And Uses By Meera Pal Contributor How Long Are Cats Pregnant? By Patricia Louis Editor Bordetella Vaccine For Kennel Cough In Dogs By Patricia Louis Editor Parvo In Dogs: Symptoms And Treatments By Jean Marie Bauhaus Contributor 20 Most Popular Dog Breeds (2023) By Aaliyah Pasols Contributor Human Years To Dog Years Calculator By Meera Pal Contributor Information provided on Forbes Advisor is for educational purposes only. Your financial situation is unique and the products and services we review may not be right for your circumstances. We do not offer financial advice, advisory or brokerage services, nor do we recommend or advise individuals or to buy or sell particular stocks or securities. Performance information may have changed since the time of publication. Past performance is not indicative of future results. Forbes Advisor adheres to strict editorial integrity standards. To the best of our knowledge, all content is accurate as of the date posted, though offers contained herein may no longer be available. The opinions expressed are the author’s alone and have not been provided, approved, or otherwise endorsed by our partners. Ashley Kilroy Contributor Ashley is a personal finance writer and content creator. In addition to being a contributing writer at Forbes, she writes for solo entrepreneurs as well as for Fortune 500 companies. Through her financial expertise, she provides millennials and young professionals the tools and resources they need to better manage their finances. © 2023 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved. AdChoices AdChoices Privacy Statement Terms and Conditions About Us Contact Us Careers Coupons Newsroom Forbes Quote of the Day Advertise lorem Are you sure you want to rest your choices? cancel ok The Forbes Advisor editorial team is independent and objective. To help support our reporting work, and to continue our ability to provide this content for free to our readers, we receive compensation from the companies that advertise on the Forbes Advisor site. This compensation comes from two main sources. First, we provide paid placements to advertisers to present their offers. The compensation we receive for those placements affects how and where advertisers’ offers appear on the site. This site does not include all companies or products available within the market. Second, we also include links to advertisers’ offers in some of our articles; these “affiliate links” may generate income for our site when you click on them. The compensation we receive from advertisers does not influence the recommendations or advice our editorial team provides in our articles or otherwise impact any of the editorial content on Forbes Advisor. While we work hard to provide accurate and up to date information that we think you will find relevant, Forbes Advisor does not and cannot guarantee that any information provided is complete and makes no representations or warranties in connection thereto, nor to the accuracy or applicability thereof. Here is a list of our partners who offer products that we have affiliate links for. 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

More For VeterinariansChat Get a QuoteHow pet insurance worksIs pet insurance worth it?How to compare pet insuranceWhy Pawlicy Advisor?New puppy checklistOur blogFor veterinariansHomefetch@pawlicy.com1-(866)-729-5429 Chat With Us Return To Previous Quote Get a quotePet Care Blog39 Dog Care Tips: The Ultimate Pet Parent’s GuideAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineWhether you’ve just adopted a new puppy or you’ve had dogs your whole life, there's bound to be something in this list of dog care tips that you didn't know - but should. As someone who's worked in animal hospirtals for 10+ years, and an avid #doglover, I promise this massive list of 39 dog care tips will help you be a better pet parent. Here's what you'll find: Dog health tips Housekeeping and puppy-proofing Exercise and mental stimulation Bonding Training Winter care Summer care Dog safety Dog Health Tips 1. Don't overfeed your dog, it will significantly impact their health and happiness More than 50% of dogs in America are obese and this number is on the rise. Overweight dogs are at increased risk of metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, joint diseases, a lowered immune system, and many other health problems. They also are less mobile and can’t run, play, or do other activities as much as they’d like. Do your pet a favor, feed them the amount recommended by their vet and don’t give in to those puppy dogs eyes when they ask for more! 2. Touch your dog’s nose Your dog’s nose should feel wet. The level of moisture will vary between dogs and by time of year, but a healthy dog will have a cool and slightly wet nose because dogs secrete sweat through their nose to cool down. 3. Make annual vet appointments Let the experts examine your dog regularly to screen them for any health issues and to provide you with the best, personalized information to keep your precious pup healthy for many years. 4. Make a "pet first aid" kit Accidents and emergencies happen and being prepared with all the essentials to help your dog is a crucial step in being a responsible pet owner. This is especially important if you take your dog out hiking or camping, whenever you may be far away from help. A DIY pet first aid kit is something every dog parent should have. 5. Get pet insurance Emergency and unexpected accidents and illnesses often cost $800 to $1500. With as many as a third of pets needing emergency care per year, this can quickly become a financial burden. Pet insurance can help to cover these unexpected costs, prescription medications, long term health conditions and more, making it an important investment for the furry members of your family. Pro Tip: Explore the pet insurance marketplace on Pawlicy Advisor.) 6. Brush your dog’s teeth Brushing your dog’s teeth is often overlooked, but hugely important to their overall health and avoiding expensive dental treatments in the future. Make this a part of their normal routine and make sure to use a toothpaste made specifically for dogs. With a little bit of time and training, teeth brushing can be a fun activity for your pet every day! 7. Have an emergency plan in place It’s not pleasant to think about, but it’s crucial that you have a plan for your dog in place should anything happen to you. Make a list of important information about your dog’s lifestyle including how often they’re fed, how much they’re fed, medications, their vet’s phone number, etc. Give copies of this to someone in your life that could take care of your dog in the case of an emergency. It’s also worth your time to ask around and make sure you have at least one or two people who live close-by that could help your dog on short notice. 8. Play with Purpose When petting and playing with your dog, especially when they are young, intentionally play with their feet, ears, and mouth. By doing things like touching their feet, toes and nails during positive play experience, you will desensitize them to being touched in these areas when its time for nail trims. Looking in their ears and mouth and getting them used to being handled in this way will make it much easier for your vet to examine your dog when they go in for check ups. This will make your vet’s job easier, your pup will be less stressed during their exam, and your vet will be more likely to catch any abnormalities in the event that there is something wrong with your dog. Housekeeping and puppy-proofing 9. Keep your trash secured Dogs are drawn to the delicious smell of your trash and may eat things that are toxic, harmful, or not digestible , so make sure your trash is secure. Ingestion of foreign objects or toxic substances could lead to costly emergency surgeries. 10. Give your dog a safe space Have a temperate area of your home with your dog’s bed or blanket, some toys, and a water bowl, where your dog feels safe and can easily take naps during the day. This can help your dog to self-soothe during stressful situations, like parties, a baby crying, or thunderstorms. If your dog was crate trained as a rescue puppy or when joining your family, keeping their crate open and available even after they no longer need it for training may provide them with a perfect place just for them that they’ll love to have. 11. Lock up household toxins Always keep your household chemicals, such as cleaners and pesticides, out of reach from your dog. Many clever dogs can and will get into products kept under the sink or in the garage. Try using baby proof locks to seal cabinets with toxic products. 12. Regularly wash your dog’s things Germs, dirt, pollen, and more end up on your dog’s bedding, soft toys, and blankets. Make sure you’re washing these items weekly to keep them fresh and clean for your dog. If your dog suffers from seasonal allergies, this can be especially helpful in reducing their pollen exposure. 13. Keep your dog away from human food Many human foods, such as chocolate, avocados, or onions, are toxic to dogs and can have serious ramifications to their health. Keep human food out of reach and be especially careful with gum and candies, as many contain xylitol which is a sugar-like substance toxic to dogs. Don’t feed your dog human foods on purpose unless recommended by your veterinarian. Some human foods, like plain chicken, canned pumpkin, or plain rice may be recommended intentionally by your vet for specific reasons such as digestive upset, diarrhea, to help hide oral medication or as highly motivating training treats in small quantities. In these instances “human food” may be appropriate for your dog, but they certainly don’t need to lick your dinner plate clean or eat your leftovers. PRO TIP: For a comprehsive checklist of everything you need to "puppy-proof" your home, download the free puppy checklist. Exercise and Mental Stimulation 14. Walk your dog for both their health and happiness Regular walks provide many benefits for your dog, including preventing boredom, helping the digestive tract, keeping them at a healthier weight, and helping them to burn off excess energy. By giving them a constructive outlet, you may find bad behaviors, like chewing, barking or digging, decrease too. 15. Fight boredom by adding variety Break up your dog’s normal routine by adding in extra walks or outings. Take them to a dog-friendly place or drive-in for a change of scenery. Take them on errands with you and switch up their toys to keep them mentally stimulated. 16. Challenge your dog mentally Just like us, dogs need plenty of mental stimulation to stay happy and healthy. Give your dog a puzzle toy, teach them new tricks, and play new games with them to keep them engaged. Puzzle toys are a fantastic way to give your dog something fun to do when you can’t devote 100% of your attention to them. PRO TIP: This is extra important while social-distancing with your dog. 17. Slowing down a super eater If your dog or puppy eats their meals very quickly they increase their risk of having stomach issues or upsets that may lead to vomiting. Slowing down your dog’s eating is good for their digestive health and can be done easily. One option is to buy a puzzle feeder from a pet store or online. Alternatively, a cheap easy solution is just to put a large tennis ball in their bowl. Both the ball or puzzle toy will work similarly making your dog have to work around the inedible obstacle to eat their meal. 18. Exercise together Race your dog in the park, try dog yoga, climb stairs with your dogs, or take them on an adventurous hike. You’ll both reap the benefits of exercise as you have fun together. Bonding 19. Be a friend to your dog Dogs need love and affection to thrive. Make sure they’re spending plenty of time inside with you and your family. Give them attention, treats, and play games with them. 20. Have patience with them It can be challenging when your dog acts out or isn’t picking up on a new training technique, but with some grace and patience, they’ll be more likely to continue trying. If you’re feeling frustrated, take a break from training and consider consulting your vet or local training professional. Dogs are very good at reading our body language and won’t respond well to training if you are tense or angry. 21. Hang out with them while they eat Dogs are by nature pack animals and you’re their pack. Stay near them when they eat and make this an ongoing communal act. Picky eaters might also show more interest in their food when they see you take an interest. Training 22. Applaud your pet when they successfully relieve themselves outside Potty training can be difficult, especially with stubborn dog breeds. Applaud and cheer your dog on when they go outside and do their business every time and they’ll eagerly continue this behavior until it becomes a habit. For dogs who are learning to be house-trained, bring treats outside with you and immediately reward your dog after they finish peeing or pooping somewhere you approve of. If you do this every time, and take your puppy out frequently enough (including after every meal, after every drink of water, and at least every 4-6 hours) house breaking will be significantly easier. 23. Make training a game Switch up the treats, rewards, and praise. If they view training as a game, rather than something they are scolded during, they will have more fun and you’ll see better results. You may also find that your dog responds better to different types of rewards through this process. When training, always reward positive behavior with treats, a clicker, pets, and/or verbal praise and simply ignore bad behavior. They will learn if they want a reward they must do what you’ve asked of them. 24. Consistent training is key Decide what the “house rules” for your dog are and stick with them! Will your dog be allowed on furniture, in all parts of the house, or around the family during dinnertime? Stick with the same training commands and rules while training your dog to prevent confusion. Make sure all members of your family are on the same page and agree to consistently abide by the rules to avoid confusing your pup or perpetuating bad behavior. 25. Immediately correct bad behavior Dogs have a short memory and if you scold them for doing something wrong five minutes later, they will not correlate the scolding with the bad behavior. Reprimand them only if you catch them in the act. On the other hand, always give your dog positive feedback and rewards right away for good behavior to encourage the repetition of this behavior. Winter Care Tips 26. Moisturize your dog’s paws Cold weather can cause your dog’s paws to crack due to the dry air. Try moisturizing your dog’s paws with pad moisturizer products topically to relieve the discomfort especially if they seem raw or painful after your pup has been outside. 27. Limit their time outside Dogs are susceptible to getting frostbite, especially in their paws, ears, and tails. Even dogs with thick fur coats should not be left outside for long periods of time in chilly weather. When you start to feel chilled, take your dog inside with you because they are probably feeling cold as well. 28. Beware of ice and winter salt Both ice and winter salt on sidewalks can cause your dog’s paw pads to develop cracks or burns. Wipe your dog’s paws off after any venture outside and watch to make sure they don’t try to eat salt off the ground or lick it off their paws. If this is causing your dog consistent discomfort, consider investing in a pair of dog booties to protect the sensitive skin on their feet. They also make pet safe salt for drive and walkways that you can use around your home. Pet safe salt is non-toxic to pets feet and not harmful if they accidentally eat any of the salt. 29. Consider getting your dog a sweater Many dogs have thick coats to keep them warm outside even in the coldest months, but not all of our pups have enough fur to brave the cold. Any dog can get hypothermia, and depending on where you live, and your dog’s breed, your dog may benefit from a coat or sweater during the winter. Some early signs of hypothermia that would indicate your dog might benefit from an extra layer of insolation include shivering, rapid breathing, ears and feet being cold to the touch, increased urination, and hair standing on end. Many dogs love winter coats or sweaters; they’ll look cute and have even more protection for wintery playtime. Summer Care Tips 30. Keep your dog cool Dogs don’t sweat like us. Instead of sweating all over their body as humans do, they sweat through their paw pads and rely on panting to release heat. Giving your dogs access to shade and a way to cool down like a kiddie pool filled with water or ice as a great way to allow your dogs to safely enjoy the outdoors in warmer months. Monitor them closely during hot weather and bring them inside if they are panting excessively to prevent heat stroke, stress, and dehydration. . 31. Provide them with a constant water source Dehydration is incredibly dangerous to dogs and can happen quickly. Make sure your dog has easy access to clean, fresh water throughout the day both indoors and outdoors. Take note if they are panting excessively, lose interest in eating, or have a dry nose. Be sure to reach out to your vet if you notice these or any other unusual behavior from your dog during heat waves. 32. Avoid Toxic Algae Algae, if ingested, can be harmful and in some cases fatal for dogs. It’s tempting to take your dog to the pond or lake during the hot summertime, but always check with your local Parks and Recreation department for any environmental warnings about toxic algae, water treatments, or harmful pesticides in and around the water first. 33. Watch their feet Dog’s paw pads are sensitive to heat and can be burned when walking on hot surfaces. If you can’t comfortably place your bare hand or foot on the hot ground outside, the surface is too hot for your dog to walk on. In these cases, opt for grass, dirt, or covered paths when taking your dog out. 34. Never leave your dog in the car The inside temperature of a car can quickly become hazardous or even fatal to your dog. Never leave them unsupervised in your car, even with the windows cracked, as they can easily succumb to heatstroke. Even when the temperature is only 70 degrees outside your car will be over 100 degrees in 20 minutes. Cars can reach fatal temperatures in minutes in the summer. Dog Safety 35. Never let your dog ride in the back of your truck Approximately 100,000 dogs die from riding in the flatbed of a truck each year, whether this is from falling out of the truck bed or being hit by debris. This does not account for the many others injured in other types of vehicles. Please keep your dog inside the car with you, ideally restrained in some way. Depending on your dog's size, temperament, or the length of your drive you can safely keep your dog in a crate or carrier as long as it is secure and cannot slide around your car in the event of a sharp turn or accident. Alternately, you can keep your dog safe by buying them a seat belt attachment that buckles directly to their harness which would keep them securely in the seat. If you have any questions about where is safest for your specific dog to ride in the car you can always consult your veterinarian. 36. Keep an ID tag on your dog at all times You never know how important an ID tag is until you become separated from your dog. Take the time to have an ID tag made up with your phone number, dog’s name, and vet’s phone number. Make sure this information is kept up to date. 37. Microchip your dog Accidents happen and dogs can get loose from their collars. If your dog gets lost but is microchipped, a veterinary hospital or animal shelter will scan all found pets for microchips and can look up your personal information and get in contact with you if your dog has one. In the worst-case scenario, a microchip will also prove ownership of your dog if they were stolen. They are inexpensive, and as painless and easy as giving a vaccine. 38. Keep your dog on a leash at all times when in public Even the most obedient dog may take off running if they see another dog, human, or animal. Be responsible and keep your dog leashed in public places to avoid losing your dog or having any accidents or injuries such as dog fights, vehicle impacts, or other physical harm. 39. Consult your veterinarian before trying new foods or medications Diet or medication changes can cause several health issues for your pet if not done properly or with the instruction of your vet. You know your pet best and want to give them the best food, supplements, and necessary medical treatment possible. The best way to do that is to consult your veterinary team about any changes you’d like to make and why. That way your vet can make sure you’ve got a safe product and plan, as well as note the change in your pet’s medical records in the event your dog ever gets sick or injured, your vet will have the most accurate up to date information on your pets health and lifestyle. Take good care of your pup Quality health care for your dog is one of the most important areas to love and support your dog throughout their life, from puppy to senior. Download the new puppy checklist for an easy pdf you can save. I also strongly recommend you consider pet insurance to hedge the financial risk that you dog might injure themselves or get sick. There is nothing worse than not have the resources to treat an animal when you have the knowledge and means. Because there's so many pet insurance options on the market, explore Pawlicy Advisor's marketplace to see plans from top companies side-by-side and get personalized guidence. Do you want to find the best pet insurance?Let's analyze your pet's breed, age, and location to find the right coverage and the best savings. Ready?Analyze My PetAbout Pawlicy AdvisorThe pet insurance marketplace endorsed by veterinarians, at Pawlicy Advisor we make buying the best pet insurance easier. By comparing personalized coverage and pricing differences we can save you a ton of money, up to 83% in some instances!Learn MoreInstantly Compare Pet Insurance PlansGet QuotesGuidesHow Pet Insurance WorksHow To Compare PlansDetermine If Pet Insurance Is Worth ItDetermine If Wellness Plans Are Worth ItVet Visit CostsNew Puppy ChecklistComparison ChartsASPCA vs. Pets BestPets Best vs. EmbraceEmbrace vs. PumpkinPumpkin vs. MetLifeMore Comparison ChartsFind Your StateNew JerseyCaliforniaFloridaOregonTexasNew YorkColoradoPennsylvaniaMore StatesDog InsuranceGerman ShepherdRottweilerAkitaBoxerEnglish BulldogFrench BulldogGreat DanePugCorgiChihuahuaPoodleMore BreedsAliyah DiamondCornell University College of Veterinary MedicineAliyah Diamond has more than ten years of experience in animal hospitals - working with dozens of species from dogs and cats, to elephants and snow leopards. Her lifelong passion for helping animals currently has her earning her doctorate of veterinary medicine at Cornell University and helping Pawlicy Advisor educate pet parents.More you might like8 minute readDog Teeth Cleaning Costs: Best Ways To Save On Dental Care5 minute readDog Cataract Surgery Costs and How to Save6 minute readHow Much Does It Cost to Treat Parvo?5 minute readDog X-ray Costs and How to Save14 minute readHow Much Does a Vet Visit Cost? Here's Everything You Need To Know12 minute readBringing Home A Rescue Puppy6 minute readPetfinder: Everything You Need to Know 8 minute readKeeping Pets Happy And Healthy During COVID-19: A Pet Parent's Guide1 minute readProtecting Your Pets From Toxic AlgaeBack to BlogPawlicy Advisor is the leading independent marketplace for finding the best coverage for your pet at the lowest rate.Join 2,438,795+ insured dogs and cats across the US.Get a QuoteOur pet insurance partnersThe Pet Insurance MarketplaceABOUT PET INSURANCEHow Pet Insurance WorksIs Pet Insurance Worth ItHow To Compare Pet InsurancePet Parent DictionaryPet Insurance Advice BlogWhy Pawlicy AdvisorTOOLS & RESOURCESGet QuotesCompare ProvidersCompare Dog InsuranceCompare Cat InsuranceCompare by US StatesVets Near MePet Care LibraryCharity To Help Afford Vet CareOUR PARTNERSASPCA Pet Health InsurancePets Best Pet InsuranceEmbrace Pet InsuranceMetLife Pet InsurancePrudent Pet InsuranceFigo Pet InsuranceHartville Pet InsuranceFetch Pet InsuranceABOUT PAWLICY ADVISORAbout UsCareersLicensesTerms Of UsePrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesPawlicy Advisor2 Overhill Rd Ste 400 Scarsdale, NY 10583Tel: (866) 729-5429© 2023 Pawlicy Advisor Inc, All Rights ReservedPawlicy Advisor conducts business as Pawlicy Insurance Services Inc. in the state of California.Share screen with support 

Skip to content About Us Our Team About Us – Video Careers Pet Care Dog Services Cat Services Bird Services Pocket Pet Services New Pet Owner Information Online Store Resources Blog FAQs Helpful Resources Contact 604-463-7100 Menu ×Close 604-463-7100 About Us Our Team About Us – Video Careers Pet Care Dog Services Cat Services Bird Services Pocket Pet Services New Pet Owner Information Online Store Resources Blog FAQs Helpful Resources Contact Search the site: Search Get In Touch Alouette Animal Hospital Phone: 604-463-7100 Email: info@alouetteanimalhospital.ca After Hours Emergencies: Animal Emergency Clinic of the Fraser Valley 604-514-1711 See our address & hours × Search the site: Search General 10 Pet Care Tips 1. Regular Exams are Vital Just like you, your pet can get heart problems, develop arthritis, or have a toothache. The best way to prevent such problems or catch them early is to see your veterinarian every year. Regular exams are the single most important way to keep pets healthy. Annual vet visits should touch on nutrition and weight control, as well as cover recommended vaccinations, parasite control, dental exam, and health screenings. 2. Spay and Neuter Your Pets Eight million to 10 million pets end up in U.S. shelters every year. Some are lost, some have been abandoned, and some are homeless. Here’s an easy way to avoid adding to that number — spay and neuter your cats and dogs. It’s a procedure that can be performed as early as six to eight weeks of age. Spaying and neutering doesn’t just cut down on the number of unwanted pets; it has other substantial benefits for your pet. Studies show it also lowers the risk of certain cancers and reduces a pet’s risk of getting lost by decreasing the tendency to roam. 3. Prevent Parasites Fleas are the most common external parasite that can plague pets, and they can lead to irritated skin, hair loss, hot spots, and infection. Fleas can also introduce other parasites into your cat or dog. All it takes is for your pet to swallow one flea, and it can to end up with tapeworms, the most common internal parasite affecting dogs and cats. Year-round prevention is key. Regular flea and intestinal parasite control, as well as heartworm prevention in endemic areas is important. Because some parasite medications made for dogs can be fatal to cats, talk to your vet about keeping your precious pets worm-free, flea-free — and safe. 4. Maintain a Healthy Weight Many dogs and cats are overweight or obese. And just like people, obesity in pets comes with health risks that include diabetes, arthritis, and cancer. Overfeeding is the leading cause of obesity, says Douglas, who adds that keeping our pets trim can add years to their lives. Because pets need far fewer calories than most of us think — as little as 185-370 a day for a small, inactive dog; just 240-350 calories daily for a 10-pound cat — talk to your vet, who can make feeding suggestions based on your pet’s age, weight, and lifestyle. 5. Get Regular Vaccinations For optimal health, pets need regular vaccinations against diseases such as rabies, distemper, feline leukemia, and canine hepatitis. How often your dog or cat needs to be immunized depends on their age, lifestyle, health, and risks so talk to your vet about the vaccinations that make sense for your pet. 6. Provide an Enriched Environment An enriched environment is another key to the long-term health and welfare of your canine and feline friends. Pets need mental stimulation which may mean daily walks for your pooch, and scratching posts, window perches, and toys for your cat. It means play time with you, which not only keeps your pet’s muscles toned and boredom at bay, it also strengthens your bond with your four-footed companions. 7. Microchip and Tattoo Your Pet Lack of identification means as few as 14% of pets ever find their way home after getting lost. Fortunately, microchipping and/or tattooing can allow for the pet to be reunited with its. About the size of a rice grain, a microchip is inserted under the skin in less than a second. It needs no battery and can be scanned by a vet or an animal control officer in seconds. 8. Pets Need Dental Care, Too Just like you, your pet can suffer from gum disease, tooth loss, and tooth pain. And just like you, regular brushing and oral cleanings help keep your pet’s teeth strong and healthy. Dental disease is one of the most common preventable illnesses in pets yet many people never even look in their pet’s mouths. It’s estimated 80% of dogs and 70% cats show signs of dental disease by age three, leading to abscesses, loose teeth, and chronic pain. In addition to regular dental cleanings by your vet, periodontal disease can be avoided by proper dental care by owners. Owner care includes brushing, oral rinses, and dental treats. 9. Never Give Pets People Medication Medicines made for humans can kill your pet. As a matter of fact, in 2010 the ASPCA listed human drugs in the top 10 pet toxins. NSAIDs like ibuprofen and naproxen are the most common pet poisoning culprits, but antidepressants, decongestants, muscle relaxants, and acetaminophen are just a few of the human drugs that pose health risks to pets. Human drugs can cause kidney damage, seizures, and cardiac arrest in a dog or cat. If you suspect your pet has consumed your medication — or anything toxic — call your veterinarian. 10. Proper Restraint in a Vehicle You buckle up for safety when you’re in the car, shouldn’t your pet? Unrestrained pets in a car are a distraction to the driver, and can put driver and pet at risk for serious injury. To keep pets safe in transit: Never allow pets to travel in the front seat, where they’re at risk of severe injury or death if the airbag deploys. Don’t let dogs ride with their head out the window or untethered in the back of a truck bed. Both practices put them at risk of being thrown from the vehicle in the event of an accident. To keep pets safe, confine cats to carriers, then secure the carrier with a seatbelt. For dogs, there’s the option of a special harness attached to a seat belt, or a well-secured kennel. For more information please visit the following link https://pets.webmd.com/ask-pet-health-11/vets-pet-care Share This Post Post navigation Next Post: What Is Kennel Cough? Back to the Blog Save Time, Order Online! We are happy to provide you with the option to browse and shop for your pet, all from the comfort of your own home! 604-463-7100 Visit Our Store Alouette Animal Hospital Contact 604-463-7100 Email: info@alouetteanimalhospital.ca Address 21409 Lougheed Hwy. Maple Ridge, British Columbia V2X 2R8 View on Google Maps Hours of Operation Monday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmTuesday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmWednesday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmThursday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmFriday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmSaturday 8:00 am - 5:00 pmSunday ClosedCLOSED ON STATUTORY HOLIDAYS After Hours Emergencies Animal Emergency Clinic of the Fraser Valley 604-514-1711 Home Our Team Careers Blog Contact Us Privacy Policy © 2023 Alouette Animal Hospital 

Select Region United States United Kingdom Germany India Canada Australia Italy ADVISOR Credit Cards Credit Cards Compare Credit Cards Best Credit Cards Best Travel Credit Cards Best Cash Back Credit Cards Best Credit Cards for Bad Credit Best Balance Transfer Credit Cards Best No-Annual-Fee Credit Cards Best Mastercards Best Student Credit Cards Best Rewards Credit Cards Best American Express Cards Best Instant Approval Credit Cards Best Low-Interest Credit Cards Best RBC Credit Cards Best Business Credit Cards Best Prepaid Credit Cards Best Visa Credit Cards Best Air Miles Credit Cards Credit Card Reviews EQ Bank Card Review Triangle Mastercard American Express Cobalt Walmart Rewards Mastercard BMO CashBack World Elite Mastercard Scotiabank Gold American Express Card CIBC Dividend Visa Infinite American Express Platinum Brim World Elite Mastercard Tangerine Money-Back Card BMO Air Miles World Elite Mastercard Guides Valuable Credit Card Benefits Who Pays Credit Card Fees? Credit Card Interest Calculator How Many Credit Cards Should I Have? How To Get A Business Credit Card How To Increase Your Credit Limit How To Apply For A Credit Card Age to get a Credit Card Insurance Insurance Pet Insurance Best Pet Insurance In Canada Best Cheap Pet Insurance Desjardins Pet Insurance Review Fetch By The Dodo Pet Insurance Trupanion Pet Insurance Review PHI Direct Pet Health Insurance Review Furkin Pet Insurance Pets Plus Us Pet Insurance Review OVMA Pet Health Insurance Spot Pet Insurance Review Sonnet Pet Insurance Review Peppermint Pet Health Insurance Review Petsecure Pet Insurance Review The Personal Pet Insurance Travel Insurance World Nomads Travel Insurance CAA Travel Insurance Johnson MEDOC Travel Insurance TD Bank Travel Insurance TD Insurance Travel Insurance RBC Insurance Travel Insurance Manulife Financial CoverMe Travel Insurance AMA Travel Insurance Banking Banking Chequing Best Chequing Accounts Best No-Fee Chequing Accounts Best U.S. Dollar Chequing Accounts Best Student Chequing Accounts Best TD Chequing Accounts Best Scotiabank Chequing Accounts Savings Best Savings Accounts Best Joint Savings Accounts EQ Bank Review Best High Interest Savings Accounts Best RRSP Savings Accounts First Home Savings Account Best Online Bank Accounts WealthSimple Review Best TD High-Interest Savings Accounts Best Scotiabank Savings Accounts Best EQ Savings Accounts GIC Best GIC Rates Best Short-Term GIC Rates Mortgages Mortgages Home Buying & Refinancing Best Mortgage Lenders Best Private Mortgage Lenders Mortgage Rates Best 5-Year Fixed-Rate Mortgages Best 10-Year Fixed-Rate Mortgages Guides The Cost To Buy A Mobile Home? Money Transfer Money Transfer Currency Converter Investing Investing Cryptocurrency Best Crypto Exchanges 10 Best Cryptocurrencies How To Buy Bitcoin (BTC) How To Buy Cronos (CRO) How To Buy Safemoon Investing Investing Basics: How To Buy Stocks How To Buy Gold In Canada How To Invest With a Robo-Advisor Small Business Small Business Privacy & Security Best VPN Services Best Cheap VPNs Best Antivirus Software NordVPN Review ExpressVPN Review IPVanish Review Private Internet Access VPN Web Design & Hosting Best Free Website Builders Best Web Hosting Services Best Cheap Website Hosting Best Cheap Website Builders Best E-Commerce Platforms Best VPS Hosting Services 10 Best WordPress Hosting Services Best Free Blogging Platforms Best Blogging Platforms Bluehost Review GoDaddy Web Hosting Squarespace Review Zyro Review Hostwinds Review Weebly Review Hostinger Review Hostgator Web Hosting Project Management Best Free Project Management Software Best Task Management Software Best Project Management Software ClickUp Review monday.com Review Domain Registar Best Domain Registrar HR & Payroll Best Recruiting Software Best Free Job Posting Sites Best Applicant Tracking Systems Best Employee Monitoring Software ZipRecruiter Review POS Best POS Systems Shopify POS Clover POS The Cheapest Credit Card Processing Services CA USA UK DE IN AU IT CA | Change Region Back to Forbes.com CA USA UK DE IN AU IT CA | Change Region Advisor Pet Insurance Advertiser Disclosure The Forbes Advisor editorial team is independent and objective. To help support our reporting work, and to continue our ability to provide this content for free to our readers, we receive payment from the companies that advertise on the Forbes Advisor site. This comes from two main sources. First, we provide paid placements to advertisers to present their offers. The payments we receive for those placements affects how and where advertisers’ offers appear on the site. This site does not include all companies or products available within the market. Second, we also include links to advertisers’ offers in some of our articles. These “affiliate links” may generate income for our site when you click on them. The compensation we receive from advertisers does not influence the recommendations or advice our editorial team provides in our articles or otherwise impact any of the editorial content on Forbes Advisor. While we work hard to provide accurate and up to date information that we think you will find relevant, Forbes Advisor does not and cannot guarantee that any information provided is complete and makes no representations or warranties in connection thereto, nor to the accuracy or applicability thereof. 25 Dog Care Tips For Pet Parents Ashley Kilroy Contributor Updated: Mar 10, 2023, 12:04pm Fact Checked Fiona Campbell Forbes Staff Fact Checked Editorial Note: Forbes Advisor may earn a commission on sales made from partner links on this page, but that doesn't affect our editors' opinions or evaluations. Table of Contents Meet Your Dog’s Basic Needs Maintain Your Dog’s Health with Routine Care Stimulate Your Dog’s Brain and Body Keep Your Pet Safe Train and Bond with Your Dog to Strengthen Your Relationship Seasonal Care Tips Plan for Unexpected Vet Bills with Pet Insurance {{ tocState.toggleTocShowMore ? 'Show more' : 'Show less' }} As a dog owner, you may adore your pooch as if it were your own flesh and blood. And just like your children, you want to ensure you provide the best care possible so your dog can live a happy and healthy life. If you’re striving to be an excellent pet parent, here are some dog care tips to help you along the way. Meet Your Dog’s Basic Needs As a dog owner, it’s essential to understand and meet your pet’s basic needs. Whether you’re a novice pet parent or an expert, you’ll need to set the stage for your new pup. Your dog’s basic needs will consist of nutritious food, water, treats, toys and bedding to make the pup feel right at home. When you bring a new dog into your home, it’s best to make a trip to the vet as soon as possible. Your vet can help you pinpoint the right type and the amount of food and other important things you need to know about caring for your new friend. Monitor food consumption Pet obesity is on the rise, with an estimated 50% to 60% of pets in Canada being diagnosed as overweight or obese. According to the Canadian Veterinary Medical Association, weight control and management is the number one thing a pet owner can do to increase the length and quality of their pet’s life. Unfortunately, overweight canines are susceptible to many health risks such as metabolic abnormalities, cardiovascular disease or poor immune systems. While you may want to spoil your pet, avoid spoiling them with food. Provide sufficient water throughout the day All dogs need to have clean and fresh water available at all times of the day. Make sure to replenish the water and wash all food and water dishes so they don’t hold bacteria. Regularly groom your dog Regularly grooming your pet ensures they are clean and pest-free. While some dogs only need a bath every few months, others need regular grooming. If your dog sheds, you’ll want to brush them often. Nail trimming is also a must. Neglecting to trim your dog’s nails can cause health problems such as injured tendons and deformed feet. Maintain Your Dog’s Health with Routine Care Proactively tending to your pet’s well-being and health care ensures it lives the very best and healthiest life possible. If you have pet insurance, you can usually offset the cost of routine care by adding a wellness package to your plan. For example, Spot pet insurance offers an Advanced Wellness Plan add-on that includes $80 of coverage for an annual wellness exam and $80 of coverage for vaccinations, including Bordetella, rabies, Lyme disease and DHLPP. Schedule annual check-ups with your vet One of the best ways to keep your pet healthy is to visit the vet regularly so they can examine your dog for any health concerns. Look for solutions for flea, tick and heartworm prevention Fleas and ticks put you and your pet’s health at risk since they can transmit diseases like Lyme disease, plague and Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Heartworm disease, spread by infected mosquitos, can cause damage to your dog’s arteries, heart and lungs. Talk to your veterinarian about preventative measures, such as topical and oral medications. For heartworm disease prevention, dogs typically need monthly treatment from June 1 to November 1. Maintain proper vaccinations Vaccinations help protect your dog’s body from invasive diseases. Standard canine vaccines usually include parvovirus, distemper, rabies and canine hepatitis. If you groom or board your pooch, you may also need a vaccine against Bordetella bronchiseptica, which can cause kennel cough. Your vet can help pinpoint the vaccines appropriate for your hound. Consider spaying or neutering your pet Spaying and neutering pets isn’t just about population control—it can help protect your canine companion from certain diseases. For example, spaying your female dog can decrease her chances of uterus infections and breast tumors. Neutering male dogs can protect them from testicular cancer and prostate concerns. Brush your dog’s teeth While often overlooked, dental care is also essential for maintaining your pet’s health. Regularly brushing your pup’s teeth can help prevent dental illnesses that can end up affecting your dog’s kidney and liver function. Dental cleaning might also be recommended, but it can cost a few hundred dollars to $1,000, depending on your location. Some pet insurance companies, such as Desjardins, have dental illness coverage that includes dental cleanings. Stimulate Your Dog’s Brain and Body A balance of physical and mental stimulation plays a significant role in your dog’s health. It can also encourage good behaviour while discouraging harmful behaviours that can wreak havoc on your patience and home. As the saying goes: A tired dog is a good dog. Exercise your dog every day Regular exercise promotes bone, joint, muscle and organ health. Walking can also eliminate boredom and provide mental stimulation. You can also create an exercise routine with your pet, such as climbing stairs, going for a hike or running around the backyard. While different sizes and breeds of dogs require varying levels of exercise, creating an exercise routine with your four-legged friend is essential. Challenge your dog’s brain Man’s best friend benefits from mental stimulation. Teach your dog new tricks, play new games and create puzzles. Since dogs have a heightened sense of smell, they love using their nose to explore. Try scattering a few treats around the home for your dog to find. Create a slow-pace mealtime Some dogs love gobbling up their food in one gulp. But eating too quickly may create digestive issues or result in vomiting. Slow down your dog’s eating habits. Consider a puzzle feeder at mealtime or place a tennis ball in their food bowl so they have to eat around it. Keep Your Pet Safe Dangers are lurking inside and outside of your home that could cause harm to your pooch. Here are some tips for keeping your dog safe and out of trouble. Register your pup City and local pet laws often require dog owners to register their pets. Check your local municipality so you can ensure your dog is properly licensed. You’ll want to attach the licence to its collar to prove your dog is registered if it gets lost. Consider a microchip If your dog becomes lost, a microchip can help you locate your pet. Microchips are painless to implant and contain your contact information. They can usually be scanned at animal shelters and veterinary offices. Secure trash, chemicals and toxins around your home Dogs are curious creatures, but sometimes their curiosity can put them at risk of injury or illness—especially when exploring your home. To keep your dog out of harm’s way, secure your trash, toxins and other chemicals found around the house. Create a safe space for your dog Dogs can feel anxious or stressed under certain situations, like the sound of thunder or noisy houseguests. Creating a safe space for your pet can provide comfort and security when it needs to retreat. Have a place in your home with some creature comforts such as a bed, blanket, toys and fresh water. Clean your dog’s stuff Washing your dog’s toys, blankets and bedding removes germs, dirt, pollen and other things that can irritate your pet. Some dogs suffer from seasonal allergies, so make sure you wash your dog’s bedding on a regular basis. Keep food out of your dog’s reach Food items such as avocados, chocolate and onions are toxic to dogs. Keeping these items out of their reach can help avoid some serious health consequences. Generally, you shouldn’t give your pup “people food” like your leftovers. But some “people food” items such as plain chicken, plain rice and canned pumpkin might be recommended by your vet for specific problems, like digestive issues. Use a leash while in public By always using a leash in public places, you can help your pet avoid accidents and injuries. For example, if your dog spots a squirrel and bolts after it, your dog could be at risk of getting hit by a car. Train and Bond with Your Dog to Strengthen Your Relationship Bonding and training your dog go hand-in-hand. By doing both, you are building a relationship of respect, communication and companionship. Prioritize one-on-one time with your pup Dogs flourish on love and affection from their owners. Prioritizing daily interactions with your pet strengthens your bond. You can do so by petting, playing and giving your dog treats. Practice patience and consistency Training a dog takes a lot of patience and consistency. Dogs can sense negative energy, so if they feel as though you’re angry or agitated, they may not perform as well. If you’re struggling to train your dog, consult with a professional or ask your vet for guidance. Remember, training your pup won’t happen overnight, so stick with it—the results are worth it. Consider positive reinforcement training Practicing positive reinforcement training means you reward your pet for good behaviors and ignore the bad. This training method builds your dog’s confidence, encourages cooperation and increases tolerance. On top of that, it can bolster your bond with your canine. Seasonal Care Tips Varying temperatures and weather conditions can impact how to care for your furry confidant. Here are some tips to keep in mind whether it’s winter, spring, summer or fall. Monitor your pet’s time outside In the winter, frigid temperatures can cause frostbite on your dog’s ears, paws and tail. In the summer months, heat can dehydrate your pup and cause heat stroke. Make sure you keep an eye on the weather and limit your dog’s time outside in extreme weather. Pay close attention to your dog’s paws In the winter months, salt and ice can contribute to cracks in the pads of your pet’s feet. While in the summer months, hot asphalt or concrete can create burns and cause pain. Consider using booties to protect your dog’s paws, or try walking in the grass. Steer clear of toxic algae When hiking, walking or simply venturing around your property, a run-in with water containing toxic algae, such as blue-green algae, can make your dog very sick. Check your local Parks and Recreation department, municipality or conservation area to identify bodies of water that could contain harmful bacteria or toxins that may make your dog sick. Avoid leaving your pet in a hot car Never leave your dog unsupervised in the car. Even if you think the weather outside is comfortable, temperatures can quickly reach dangerous levels, putting your dog at risk for serious illness or death. You may also be subjected to animal cruelty penalties under municipal, provincial or federal legislation under Canada’s Criminal Code. Plan for Unexpected Vet Bills with Pet Insurance Even with the best planning and preventive measures, unexpected accidents and illnesses can still happen, which can result in major vet bills. For example, your dog might tear its cruciate ligament while chasing a ball or it might get sick with a serious illness such as cancer. A good way to help offset vet bills is with pet insurance. And it may be more affordable than you think. The average cost of pet insurance for a dog is $76 per month, according to a Forbes Advisor Canada analysis of pet insurance rates. That includes $5,000 of annual coverage, a $100 deductible and 80% reimbursement level. If you’re not sure if pet insurance is worth it, here’s a scenario to consider: Your dog tears its ACL and needs surgery. The vet bills are $4,000. If you had pet insurance with a $100 deductible and 80% reimbursement level, your out-of-pocket costs would be $900 ($4,000 – $800 (the 20% you pay) – $100 deductible = $3,100 reimbursed). You can find a good price by comparing pet insurance quotes online or by speaking with an independent insurance agent. Pet Insurance Reviews Trupanion Pet Insurance Review Fetch By The Dodo Pet Insurance OVMA Pet Health Insurance Review Desjardins Pet Insurance Review Peppermint Pet Health Insurance Review Best Pet Insurance In Canada PHI Direct Pet Health Insurance Review Pets Plus Us Pet Insurance Review Best Cheap Pet Insurance Spot Pet Insurance Furkin Pet Insurance Review Sonnet Pet Insurance Review Petsecure Pet Insurance Review Guides Dog Shaming Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance How Often Should I Take My Dog To The Vet? Pet Dental Insurance Explained What Is A Pet Insurance Deductible? Is Pet Insurance Worth It Does Pet Insurance Cover Spaying And Neutering? What Does Pet Insurance Cover? What Is A Pet Insurance Waiting Period? What Is A Pet Insurance Waiting Period? More from Best Cheap Pet Insurance In Canada For October 2023 By Fiona Campbell Forbes Staff Best Pet Insurance In Canada For October 2023 By Fiona Campbell Forbes Staff The Personal Pet Insurance Program Review 2023 By Fiona Campbell Forbes Staff Petsecure Pet Insurance Review 2023 By Fiona Campbell Forbes Staff Sonnet Pet Insurance Review 2023 By Fiona Campbell Forbes Staff What Is A Pet Insurance Waiting Period? By Jason Metz Editor Information provided on Forbes Advisor is for educational purposes only. Your financial situation is unique and the products and services we review may not be right for your circumstances. We do not offer financial advice, advisory or brokerage services, nor do we recommend or advise individuals or to buy or sell particular stocks or securities. Performance information may have changed since the time of publication. Past performance is not indicative of future results. Forbes Advisor adheres to strict editorial integrity standards. To the best of our knowledge, all content is accurate as of the date posted, though offers contained herein may no longer be available. The opinions expressed are the author’s alone and have not been provided, approved, or otherwise endorsed by our partners. Ashley Kilroy Contributor Ashley is a personal finance writer and content creator. In addition to being a contributing writer at Forbes, she writes for solo entrepreneurs as well as for Fortune 500 companies. Through her financial expertise, she provides millennials and young professionals the tools and resources they need to better manage their finances. © 2023 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved. AdChoices AdChoices Privacy Statement Terms and Conditions About Us Contact Us Send Us Feedback Jobs At Forbes Forbes Press Room Forbes Quote of the Day Advertise 

Skip to content ASPCA Our WorkHelping People and PetsInvestigations and RescueAnimal Care and RecoveryImproving Laws for AnimalsThe Puppy IndustryProtecting Farm AnimalsAdvancing Horse WelfareASPCA GrantsLocal ServicesNew York CityLos AngelesMiami, FLAsheville, NCOklahoma City, OKHow You Can HelpWays to GiveGet InvolvedFind More Humane FoodAdopt a PetAdvocate for AnimalsReceive Text Updates Primary Nav Menu Our WorkHelping People and Pets Investigations and Rescue Animal Care and Recovery Improving Laws for Animals The Puppy Industry Protecting Farm Animals Advancing Horse Welfare ASPCA Grants Local ServicesNew York City Los Angeles Miami, FL Asheville, NC Oklahoma City, OK How You Can HelpWays to Give Get Involved Find More Humane Food Adopt a Pet Advocate for Animals Receive Text Updates Search form Search About Us Adopt NYC News ASPCA Pro Donate You are herePet Care Dog Care General Dog Care A dog can be a wonderful addition to any home, but whether you're an experienced pet parent or a first-time adopter, it's important to keep your canine companion's health and happiness a top priority. Below are some useful tips for all dog parents.And remember: If you're considering bringing home a new dog, please make adoption your first option. We encourage you to browse our directory of adoptable dogs in your area or visit our Find a Shelter page to start your search.FeedingPuppies eight to 12 weeks old need four meals a day.Feed puppies three to six months old three meals a day.Feed puppies six months to one year two meals a day.When your dog reaches his first birthday, one meal a day is usually enough.For some dogs, including larger canines or those prone to bloat, it's better to feed two smaller meals.Premium-quality dry food provides a well-balanced diet for adult dogs and may be mixed with water, broth or canned food. Your dog may enjoy cottage cheese, cooked egg or fruits and vegetables, but these additions should not total more than ten percent of his daily food intake.Puppies should be fed a high-quality, brand-name puppy food (large breed puppy foods for large breeds). Please limit "people food," however, because it can result in vitamin and mineral imbalances, bone and teeth problems and may cause very picky eating habits and obesity. Clean, fresh water should be available at all times, and be sure to wash food and water dishes frequently.ExerciseDogs need exercise to burn calories, stimulate their minds, and stay healthy. Individual exercise needs vary based on breed or breed mix, sex, age and level of health. Exercise also tends to help dogs avoid boredom, which can lead to destructive behaviors. Supervised fun and games will satisfy many of your pet's instinctual urges to dig, herd, chew, retrieve and chase.GroomingHelp keep your dog clean and reduce shedding with frequent brushing. Check for fleas and ticks daily during warm weather. Most dogs don't need to be bathed more than a few times a year. Before bathing, comb or cut out all mats from the coat. Carefully rinse all soap out of the coat, or the dirt will stick to soap residue. Please visit our Dog Grooming Tips page for more information.HandlingTo carry a puppy or small dog, place one hand under the dog's chest, with either your forearm or other hand supporting the hind legs and rump. Never attempt to lift or grab your puppy or small dog by the forelegs, tail or back of the neck. If you do have to lift a large dog, lift from the underside, supporting his chest with one arm and his rear end with the other.HousingYour pet needs a warm, quiet place to rest, away from all drafts and off the floor. A training crate or dog bed is ideal, with a clean blanket or pillow placed inside. Wash the dog's bedding often. If your dog will be spending a lot of time outdoors, be sure she has access to shade and plenty of cool water in hot weather, and a warm, dry, covered shelter when it's cold.Licensing and IdentificationFollow your community’s licensing regulations. Be sure to attach the license to your dog’s collar. This, along with an ID tag and implanted microchip or tattoo, can help secure your dog’s return should she become lost.Fleas and TicksDaily inspections of your dog for fleas and ticks during the warm seasons are important. Use a flea comb to find and remove fleas. There are several new methods of flea and tick control. Speak to your veterinarian about these and other options. Visit our Fleas and Ticks page for more information.Medicines and PoisonsNever give your dog medication that has not been prescribed by a veterinarian. If you suspect that your animal has ingested a poisonous substance, call your veterinarian or the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center for 24-hour animal poison information at (888) 426- 4435.Spaying and NeuteringFemale dogs should be spayed and male dogs neutered by six months of age. Please visit our Spay/Neuter Your Pet page to learn more.VaccinationsYour dog may benefit from receiving a number of vaccinations. Please visit our Pet Vaccinations page to learn more.Dog Supply ChecklistPremium-quality dog food and treatsFood dishWater bowlToys, toys and more toys, including safe chew toysBrush & comb for grooming, including flea combCollar with license and ID tagLeashCarrier (for smaller dogs)Training crateDog bed or box with warm blanket or towelDog toothbrushThe Scoop on PoopKeep your dog on a leash when you are outside, unless you are in a secured, fenced-in area. If your dog defecates on a neighbor's lawn, the sidewalk or any other public place, please clean it up. Other Ways to Help: Become a Monthly Member Advocate for Animals Join the Advocacy Brigade Volunteer or Foster Share this page: Help the ASPCA Put a Stop to Animal Cruelty Donate Stay Up to Date First Name * Last Name * Email Address * Mobile Number (Optional) By providing my mobile number, I agree to receive 2-4 text messages per month from the ASPCA, which may include requests for charitable donations. Text STOP to opt-out, HELP for more info. Message and data rates may apply. Terms & Conditions / Privacy Policy Leave this field blank ASPCA About Us Careers Contact Press Strategic Cause Partnerships Pet Care Shop © 2023 American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. All rights reserved.The ASPCA is a 501(c)(3) non-for-profit organization. Privacy Policy Legal Info FacebookTwitterYoutubeInstagramTikTok Our Partnerships Subaru ASPCA Pet Health Insurance Underwritten by United States Fire Insurance Company 

Skip Navigation Where To Buy Sign Up & Save For Dogs FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint For Cats FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Learn Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Contact Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Skip Navigation For Dogs For Cats Learn Contact FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Where To Buy Sign Up & Save Home 10 Everyday Helpful Pet Care Tips | Hill's Pet 10 Responsible Pet Care Tips tags routine-care Dog Cat Published by min read Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Find food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Shop All Cat Food Find a dog food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Find a cat food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Cat Food As a pet parent you want to do everything you can to care for your pet; this involves regular, everyday activities to ensure they stay happy and healthy. Practice these ten responsible pet care tips year after year for a lifetime of happy and healthy cats and dogs. 1. Veterinarian Visits Responsible pet ownership starts with regular visits to the veterinarian. Given their shorter-than-human lifespan, your dog or cat should be getting a checkup at least once or twice a year. Depending on your pet's vaccination schedule, they may go more frequently when they're young, but establishing and maintaining good pet health means keeping up with vet visits as they age. Trips to the vet can be, shall we say, challenging. Cats, in particular, may be averse to leaving the comfy confines of their home, but there are ways to reduce stress for both of you. Acclimating your cat to her carrier when she is a kitten is good practice (and avoids the running-away-and-hiding-under-the-bed scenario). Dogs tend to like going for car rides. Take your pup on joyrides, so he won't associate getting into the car with going to the vet. And many pets don't mind a trip to the veterinarian's office, especially if you choose a vet that's a good fit for your little friend. 2. Vaccinations Vaccinating your pets is a vital component of responsible pet care. Soon after welcoming your new pet into your home, schedule an immunization appointment. During your first visit, the vet will set up an immunization schedule for your little pup or kitten to protect them from illness and disease. Vaccinations for puppies should happen early in your puppies first few weeks after you bring him home. Talk to your vet at your first appointment, on when a good time to schedule that visit. They help prevent diseases such as rabies, Lyme disease, and distemper. Cats benefit from vaccines that prevent feline herpes virus, feline leukemia, and rabies. If you've adopted an adult or senior animal, make sure they are immunized, too. Vaccinations do need renewal and aren't just for young pets. 3. Proper Identification If the unthinkable happens and your little guy or gal gets lost — youngsters in particular are prone to dashing out the door — having proper identification is the key to a happy ending. Start with the basics: a safe collar, and a tag that contains all of your contact information. In addition to an ID tag, microchipping your pet is advisable, because there's always the chance a collar will fall off. The microchip, an electronic device about the size and shape of a grain of rice, is implanted under your pet's skin and can be read by a scanner that pulls up your identification information. A combination of these forms of identification will go a long way to reuniting you and your beloved pet, but only if you keep your contact information up-to-date. Be sure to change your information on file with the microchip if you have a change in address or phone number. 4. Spaying/Neutering Sterilizing your pet prevents a host of health problems, including complicated pregnancies, and reduces the number of homeless animals. Spaying your kitty (removing the uterus and ovaries) greatly reduces her risk for cervical cancer, eliminates the risk of ovarian cancer, and prevents her from going into "heat." That minimizes the chance that she'll stray from home in search of a partner, and any nearby male cats will be less aggressive (and they won't spray to mark their territory, something that benefits you and your furniture). Neutering your puppy helps alleviate aggression and roaming the neighborhood, and will prevent him from getting testicular cancer. Because spaying or neutering is surgery that requires general anesthesia, your pet will likely stay overnight at the vet's office for at least one night for observation and recuperation. 5. Healthy Food Two connected elements of responsible pet ownership include providing animals with fresh, cool water and healthy food at all times. The right pet food will enrich your best buddy's life, providing them with the energy and nutrients they need. With so many meal options to choose from, it can be daunting, but you can become adept in no time by familiarizing yourself with important ingredients and how they help your pup or kitty. When choosing the best cat food, look for a good balance of protein, carbs and fats. These are important ingredients for dog food, too, as is plenty of fiber for the digestive system. In addition to healthy ingredients, select a pet food formula that is appropriate for your pet's age, health conditions and activity level, and speak to your vet before switching your pet to a specialized food. 6. At-Home Care As your pets' caretaker, your job is to provide them with good hygiene habits at home as well as at the vet's or groomer's. Brushing their teeth, combing their coats and providing them with healthy food all keeps them in tip-top shape. To stay on track with responsible pet care, schedule hygiene and grooming tasks in your calendar and try combining tasks, such as a comforting comb after trimming nails, until it becomes routine. 7. Comfy Quarters As the seasons change or you rearrange your living space, take a look around to see that you're providing your pet with a safe, cozy habitat. Dog bed looking a little flat? Buy your pup a new one. Litter box area not cutting it anymore? Spruce up your kitty's bathroom with a new box and scoop. This also is a good time to check for potential hazards. Look for exposed cords or wires (young animals find these to be great chew toys), secure safety gates, repair loose windows or screens and remove any plants that are poisonous to your pet. 8. Training and Socializing One of the most important aspects of responsible pet care is ensuring your dog or cat is well-trained, and proper socializing is a part of that. Starting when they're young is best and most effective, but it's never too late to learn new tricks. Toilet training is the number one priority for any animal with whom you share your home, as is working on obedience training. Learning socialization skills will help your puppy or kitten bond with you and with other pets. Ask your vet or local animal shelter for recommendations for good trainers in your area or at-home training guides to read. A well-trained pet is a happy pet, and that translates to a happy pet parent. 9. Following Dog Park Rules Taking your dog outside to play is one heck of a good time, and, being the social creatures they are, dogs love a good romp outdoors. If you decide to take your pup to a dog park, abide by the posted rules. Proper dog park etiquette, such as bringing your own toys and not bringing in food, keeps everyone safe, especially if a dog is aggressive or under-socialized. Bring along treats for afterward to reward your guy for his good behavior. Vets also recommend that you wait until your dog is at least four months old before bringing him to the dog park to ensure he's vaccinated before being exposed to other animals. 10. Safe Playtime It's no secret that dogs and cats love to play, and it's an effective relationship-building activity. Take stock of their toys. Are they safe? Be mindful of threadbare stuffed toys that pose choking hazards and hard, sharp edges that could cause injury. Throw away and replace playthings that are worn out. Making DIY cat toys and dog toys is a great, inexpensive way to bring even more fun to pet parenting! Remember, these tips aren't applicable just during pet holidays — make them part of your regular pet parenting role, and you and your pets will reap the benefits for a lifetime! Contributor Bio Christine O'Brien Christine O'Brien is a writer, mom, and long-time cat parent whose two Russian Blues rule the house. Her work also appears in Care.com, What to Expect, and Fit Pregnancy, where she writes about pets, pregnancy, and family life. Find and follow her on Instagram and Twitter @brovelliobrien. Related Articles Related Products Related Articles Pet Food Storage Tips Where you store your cat and dog food can make a big difference in the quality and freshness once it is opened. Here are some common questions and recommendations for optimal storage for all of Hill’s dry and canned cat and dog food. Keeping Your Pet Healthy: Important Questions to Ask Your Vet In addition to a balanced, nutritous diet and exercise, your vet is an important resource for maintaining good health in your pet. Protecting your pets this Christmas – a cautionary tale by Simon Pudsey Christmas is a fantastically stimulating time of year and some of that excitement might rub off on our pets. However, pet parent temptations could result in unfortunate illness or even worse; a very much unexpected trip to the vet for our furry friends. What to Do When Your Pet is Sprayed by a Skunk Learn about helping a curious cat who gets sprayed by a skunk and the removal of odors from your good friends at Hills Pet Nutrition. Related products Hill's Science Diet Adult Chicken Recipe Cat Food Supports healthy immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful fur Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Ocean Fish Entrée Cat Food Precisely balanced nutrition with the delicious taste of savory minced ocean fish to help fuel the energy needs of cats during the prime of their life. Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Healthy Cuisine Roasted Chicken & Rice Medley Cat Food Delicious roasted chicken and rice in a mouthwatering sauce Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Savory Chicken Entrée Cat Food Delectable chunks with tender chicken smothered in a rich gravy. Buy Now » Our Brands Prescription Diet Science Diet Browse By Age For Dogs Puppy Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) For Cats Kitten Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) Education Cat Articles And Tips Dog Articles and Tips Nutritional Philosophy About Hill's Our Company Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Careers Create or Manage a Business Account Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Shelter Partners Natural Disaster Support United States [English] (opens a modal dialog) FacebookTwitterPinterestInstagramYoutube Hillsvet.com Site Map Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Do Not Sell My Personal Information ©2021 Hill's Pet Nutrition, Inc. As used herein, denotes registered trademark status in the U.S. only; registration status in other geographies may be different. Your use of this site is subject to the terms of our Legal Statement. About our Ads. Cookie Consent Tool PLEASE SELECT YOUR PREFERRED LOCATION AND LANGUAGE Argentina Australia Austria - Österreich Беларусь Belgium - België Belgium - Belgique Belize Bolivia Brazil - Brasil България Canada (English) Canada (Français) Chile Colombia Costa Rica Croatia - Hrvatska Cyprus - English Cyprus - Greek Czech Republic - Česká Republika Denmark - Danmark Dominican Republic - República Dominicana Ecuador Eesti Finland - Suomi France - France Грузия Germany - Deutschland Greater China - Hong Kong SAR Greater China - Hong Kong SAR – (English) Greater China - Taiwan Greece - Ελλάδα Guatemala Honduras Magyarország India Indonesia Ireland ישראל Italy - Italia 日本 Latvia - Latvija Lietuva Malaysia (Bahasa) México Netherlands - Nederland New Zealand Nicaragua Norway - Norge Panamá Paraguay Peru Philippines (English) Poland - Polska Portugal Puerto Rico (English) Puerto Rico (Español) 대한민국 Republic of Singapore (English) România Russia - Россия Srbija Slovensko Slovenija South Africa Spain - España Sweden - Sverige Switzerland (Suisse) Switzerland (Schweiz) Svizzera Thailand - ไทย Turkey - Türkiye United Kingdom Ukraine - Україна United Arab Emirates (English) United States Uruguay Venezuela 

Skip to main content My account Shop Battersea Dogs & Cats Home My account Donate Search Search menu Menu Icon Dogs Cats What we doRehoming Caring for our animals Animal welfare campaigning Working with other rescues Supporting pet owners More about us RehomingHow to rehome a dog How to rehome a cat Meet the dogs Meet the cats Giving your dog up for adoption Giving your cat up for adoption Support usDonate Christmas Carol Concert Legacies and In Memory Paw Draw weekly lottery Philanthropy Buy a gift for our animals Other ways to give Challenge events Volunteer Fostering Business partnerships Fundraising Pet adviceAdvice on asking your landlord to allow pets when you rent Advice on finding a flat or house to rent which allows pets Dog advice What are your legal rights as a tenant when renting with a pet? Cat advice Shop Wear Blue for RescueGreg James and Barney's Story HomePet adviceDog adviceSearch dog advice Dog Care Advice on asking your landlord to allow pets when you rent Advice on finding a flat or house to rent which allows pets Dog adviceDealing with stress and separation anxiety in dogs Search dog adviceDog care Lost and found dog advice How to teach your dog to sit How to teach a dog its name How to teach a dog to stand How to teach your dog to settle How to approach a dog How to toilet train a dog Toxic foods that dogs can't eat Dog microchipping Dog neutering Dog insurance Winter dog care ​Dogs and fireworks How to keep dogs cool in the summer Puppy Advice Basics of clicker training Blind dog care and training Brain games for dogs Canine brucellosis: everything you need to know Caring for your senior dog Deaf Dog Care and Training Dealing with resource guarding Desensitising your dog to loud noises Dog theft advice Getting Your Dog Used to Car Travel Getting dogs used to people in face masks How to Find a Qualified Dog Trainer or Behaviourist How to Stop Your Dog Barking How to Use a Long-line Lead How to crate train your dog How to deal with Lead Frustration How to deal with your dog’s stranger issues How to feed your dog on a budget How to find a dog walker, day care or dog sitter How to introduce your dog to other dogs on walks How to manage your dog’s chase behaviours How to set up a training environment for your dog How to settle in your new puppy or dog How to stop my puppy mouthing How to stop your dog begging for food How to stop your dog from digging How to teach a dog to lie down How to teach a dog to stay How to teach your dog not to jump up How to teach your dog the watch me command How to teach your dog to greet people How to teach your dog to high five How to teach your dog to walk on a lead How to teach your dog to weave between your legs How to train your dog How to trek with your dog Introducing a new dog to an existing dog in the family Introducing your new dog to an existing cat Keeping children and dogs safe together Muzzle training your dog Online Dog Training Classes Plants That Are Poisonous To Dogs Preparing your dog for the arrival of a baby Rehoming a retired Greyhound Sleep startle in dogs Teach Your Dog a ‘Bed’ Command Teach your dog a nose "touch" Teach your dog to do a spin Teach your dog to hold an item Teaching your dog a recall Teaching your dog to "drop it" Teaching your dog to ‘speak’ on command The Cost of Owning a Dog Training your dog to wear a collar, lead and harness Understanding your dog’s body language What to do if your dog is stung by a bee or wasp Questions to ask when buying a puppy 10 reasons to adopt a Battersea rescue dog Finding the right dog for you Build your dog's confidence around strangers outdoors Teach your dog to take a bow What are your legal rights as a tenant when renting with a pet? Cat advice Dog Care Being a responsible dog owner is not just about feeding your dog properly and taking them to the vet if they are sick or injured. It’s about providing your dog with everything they need to live a happy and healthy life. Here are the golden rules to providing the best care for your dog. Dog care basicsExercise regularly. Usually twice a day, in all weathers. Housetrain your dog using reward based training - read our full housetraining tips. Provide extra water when feeding dried food. Provide a comfy bed in a quiet, draught-free place out of direct sunlight. Groom regularly to keep coats clean and healthy (this is essential for long-haired pets). Always supervise interactions with children to ensure children do not tease or overexcite a dog. Clean up after your dog and dispose of it in a designated bin – if you don’t, you could end up with a hefty fine. Get your dog microchippedMicrochipping is a legal requirement for all dogs in England, Scotland and Wales. To help encourage those dog owners who haven’t yet got their dogs chipped, we offer free dog microchipping at our three centres. To book an appointment at your nearest centre, please call 0800 001 4444. We microchip all Battersea dogs before they go to new homes. It is very important to keep your dog’s chip details up to date with your correct information so that you can be contacted should they go missing. Get your dog neuteredNeutering your dog not only prevents unwanted litters but can also prevent tumours and other health problems. It also has many behavioural benefits. At Battersea, we neuter all dogs before they go to new homes. Register with a vetDon’t wait until your dog becomes ill before registering with a vet. Animals need annual vaccinations, and that time is a good opportunity for a complete health check.Behaviour and veterinary problems arise for several reasons. If you notice anything of concern, speak to your vet immediately. They can either treat the medical issue or recommend a qualified trainer or behaviourist. Vaccinate your dogCaring for your dog’s health also means trying to prevent avoidable health problems developing. Dogs should have yearly vaccinations and regular worming and flea treatments. Consider getting pet insurance Pet insurance is an extremely important consideration for all dog owners. It will help guard against unexpected veterinary fees and allow you to provide the best health care for your dog. There are a number of different policies and providers to choose from, but not all pet insurance is the same. Some policies limit the amount of time or money that you can claim and that's why we recommend that you don’t choose a policy based on price alone. You should also consider Third Party Liability cover in case your dog causes an accident. All dogs and cats from Battersea go to their new homes with four weeks’ free insurance from Petplan. Socialise from a young age Providing your dog with plenty of positive experiences around other dogs and people from an early age will help prevent behavioural problems. Regular walks provide your dog with a change of scene and the chance to meet other dogs. Remember, your dog needs a social life too. Keep your dog under control In urban areas keep your dog on a lead at all times as they could easily be startled by a noise and run off and injure themselves. Before letting them off in a safe area for the first time, be confident they will come back when you want them to. Train from a puppy Remember that your puppy will grow into an adult animal – don’t encourage behaviours that you would be unhappy with when they are fully grown. At Battersea we see a lot of unruly young dogs aged between six and 18 months who have had no training as young dogs and have become too much for their owners to handle. A training class can help new owners take the right approach to training and can be great fun too! SHARE THIS: facebook twitter email 10 reasons to adopt Battersea will help you find the perfect buddy Reasons to adopt Meet the dogs These dogs are all ready to find a new home Meet the dogs WANT MORE ADVICE?From new tricks to grooming tips, get expert pet advice straight to your inbox by signing up to The Battersea Way email. SIGN UP TODAY About usJobs News and blog Our people Press Get in touchContact us Sign up for emails Login/Create an account How to find us ResourcesLost Dogs and Cats Line Publications PoliciesAccessibility Cookie and privacy policy Terms and conditions Sitemap facebook twitter youtube TikTok instagram newsletter sign up form Battersea Dogs & Cats Home Registered charity no. 206394 

Open Menu Close Menu About Our Hospital Why Trust Us? Our Team Careers COVID-19 Protocols Wellness Plans Wellness Plan Benefits Small Dogs Medium Dogs Large Dogs Giant Dogs Cats Core Care Vaccinations & Prevention Routine Exams Internal Medicine Emergency Care Dental Care Rehabilitation Senior Pet Care Puppies & Kittens Exotic Pets Boarding Surgery In-House Lab Patients Patients New Patient Form Pet Care Tips Financing - CareCredit Contact Search Search ×Close Search Search Skip to Main Content Accessible Version Standard Version 1297 W Grand Ave, Rainbow City, AL 35906 US (256) 442-2542 Shop Emergencies About Our Hospital Why Trust Us? Our Team Careers COVID-19 Protocols Wellness Plans Wellness Plan Benefits Small Dogs Medium Dogs Large Dogs Giant Dogs Cats Core Care Vaccinations & Prevention Routine Exams Internal Medicine Emergency Care Dental Care Rehabilitation Senior Pet Care Puppies & Kittens Exotic Pets Boarding Surgery In-House Lab Patients Patients New Patient Form Pet Care Tips Financing - CareCredit Contact Open Search Box Ask About Financing 6 Tips for Keeping Your Dog Healthy Along with providing your pup with all the love and attention they need, here are 6 tips from our Rainbow City veterinarians on how you can help keep your dog healthy. 1. Meet Your Dog's Nutritional Needs Your dog's nutrition is a big part of their overall health. To keep your dog in the best shape possible, speak with your vet about which type of food they recommend and how much you should be feeding your dog based on their age, size, and lifestyle. Aim for food that contains high-quality ingredients that help support a balanced diet. If your dog has special dietary or health needs, there are plenty of prescription food options available that can help your dog reach their optimal health. 2. Help Your Dog Maintain a Healthy Weight Obesity has been linked to a number of serious conditions in dogs including diabetes and joint pain, so keeping your dog at a healthy weight is essential for optimal health. While selecting high-quality food is essential, it is important to also feed your dog the correct amount. Most food bags come with guidelines based on your dog's size, but it doesn't hurt to check in with your vet to find out your pup's ideal number of daily calories. You should also monitor the number of treats your pup is getting. While treats are great training tools it's important not to feed your dog so many that you're going over their daily recommended calorie amount. Treats should only make up about 10% of your dog's daily intake. If possible, try switching up standard dog treats for low-cal healthy snacks such as pieces of apple, baby carrots, or cucumber. 3. Make Sure Your Dog Gets Plenty of Exercise Different breeds have different exercise requirements. While some dogs can stay healthy with a quick walk around the block, high-energy breeds may need an hour or more of vigorous exercise once or twice a day. Adequate physical activity not only helps to keep your dog's body in good condition, but it can also help to prevent mental boredom which can lead to destructive behaviors or anxiety. Walks, backyard games, and social time at dog parks are all great ways to ensure your pooch gets plenty of exercise. When looking into getting a dog be sure to factor in your lifestyle and try to choose a dog that matches your activity level. 4. Take Your Dog for Annual Wellness Exams Routine physical exams are important in ensuring your pet's long-term health and well-being. Taking your dog for an annual veterinary exam, even if they seem healthy, allows your vet to assess your pet's health and screen for any emerging conditions that are easier to treat when caught early. As part of their annual wellness exam, you should also talk to your vet about yearly routine bloodwork and a fecal exam. Both of these tools allow your vet to get a better look at your pet's internal health to be sure there are no hidden conditions or parasites that could make your dog sick if not treated. Learn More About Wellness Exams 5. Keep Vaccinations Vaccinations Up-To-Date Our Rainbow City vets believe that vaccinations are essential for helping your pet live a long and healthy life. Regularly scheduled vaccines help to protect your dog from many highly contagious, potentially life-threatening diseases. Most states require by law that all pets be vaccinated against rabies, but there are a number of other serious conditions that vaccines protect dogs against including parvo, distemper, and parainfluenza. Learn More About Vaccinations 6. Provide Parasite Prevention Along with regular vaccination, you should also ensure your pet is up-to-date on their parasite prevention measures. There are a host of parasites, including fleas, ticks, and heartworm, that can cause your dog to become seriously ill or uncomfortable. Speak to your vet about the most effective ways to protect your pooch against the parasites that are common in your area. Note: The advice provided in this post is intended for informational purposes and does not constitute medical advice regarding pets. For an accurate diagnosis of your pet's condition, please make an appointment with your vet. Is your dog due for a routine exam, vaccination, or parasite preventive? Contact our Rainbow City vets today to book an appointment for your canine companion. Patients Patients New Patient Form Pet Care Tips Financing - CareCredit Happy Tails from Clients Seriously the best veterinarian I have ever brought any of our animals to! Affordable and very caring! Mildred B. Pet Records Sign-in Appointment Requests Refill Requests Emergencies Patient Account Login Log in to your pet's patient account to book an appointment, refill a prescription, or access your pet's medical records. New Patients Welcome Central Valley Animal Hospital is accepting new patients! Our experienced vets are passionate about the health of Rainbow City companion animals. Get in touch today to book your pet's first appointment. Contact Us About Wellness Plans Core Care Surgery In-House Lab Patients Central Valley Animal Hospital 1297 W Grand Ave, Rainbow City, AL 35906 US Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Accessibility Search Sitemap Back to Top Copyright © 2023. All Rights Reserved. Part of the PetVet Care Centers Network. Managed with Tymbrel (256) 442-2542 Contact Open Menu Close Menu Open Menu Close Menu 

Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Sign In Breeds A-Z Expert Advice Products & Services Sports & Events Clubs & Delegates Breed Explorer View All Breeds Find By Breed Name Select A Breed Affenpinscher Afghan Hound Airedale Terrier Akita Alaskan Klee Kai Alaskan Malamute American Bulldog American English Coonhound American Eskimo Dog American Foxhound American Hairless Terrier American Leopard Hound American Staffordshire Terrier American Water Spaniel Anatolian Shepherd Dog Appenzeller Sennenhund Australian Cattle Dog Australian Kelpie Australian Shepherd Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog Australian Terrier Azawakh Barbado da Terceira Barbet Basenji Basset Fauve de Bretagne Basset Hound Bavarian Mountain Scent Hound Beagle Bearded Collie Beauceron Bedlington Terrier Belgian Laekenois Belgian Malinois Belgian Sheepdog Belgian Tervuren Bergamasco Sheepdog Berger Picard Bernese Mountain Dog Bichon Frise Biewer Terrier Black and Tan Coonhound Black Russian Terrier Bloodhound Bluetick Coonhound Boerboel Bohemian Shepherd Bolognese Border Collie Border Terrier Borzoi Boston Terrier Bouvier des Flandres Boxer Boykin Spaniel Bracco Italiano Braque du Bourbonnais Braque Francais Pyrenean Braque Saint-Germain Brazilian Terrier Briard Brittany Broholmer Brussels Griffon Bull Terrier Bulldog Bullmastiff Cairn Terrier Canaan Dog Cane Corso Cardigan Welsh Corgi Carolina Dog Catahoula Leopard Dog Caucasian Shepherd Dog Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Central Asian Shepherd Dog Cesky Terrier Chesapeake Bay Retriever Chihuahua Chinese Crested Chinese Shar-Pei Chinook Chow Chow Cirneco dell’Etna Clumber Spaniel Cocker Spaniel Collie Coton de Tulear Croatian Sheepdog Curly-Coated Retriever Czechoslovakian Vlcak Dachshund Dalmatian Dandie Dinmont Terrier Danish-Swedish Farmdog Deutscher Wachtelhund Doberman Pinscher Dogo Argentino Dogue de Bordeaux Drentsche Patrijshond Drever Dutch Shepherd English Cocker Spaniel English Foxhound English Setter English Springer Spaniel English Toy Spaniel Entlebucher Mountain Dog Estrela Mountain Dog Eurasier Field Spaniel Finnish Lapphund Finnish Spitz Flat-Coated Retriever French Bulldog French Spaniel German Longhaired Pointer German Pinscher German Shepherd Dog German Shorthaired Pointer German Spitz German Wirehaired Pointer Giant Schnauzer Glen of Imaal Terrier Golden Retriever Gordon Setter Grand Basset Griffon Vendéen Great Dane Great Pyrenees Greater Swiss Mountain Dog Greyhound Hamiltonstovare Hanoverian Scenthound Harrier Havanese Hokkaido Hovawart Ibizan Hound Icelandic Sheepdog Irish Red and White Setter Irish Setter Irish Terrier Irish Water Spaniel Irish Wolfhound Italian Greyhound Jagdterrier Japanese Akitainu Japanese Chin Japanese Spitz Japanese Terrier Jindo Kai Ken Karelian Bear Dog Keeshond Kerry Blue Terrier Kishu Ken Komondor Kromfohrlander Kuvasz Labrador Retriever Lagotto Romagnolo Lakeland Terrier Lancashire Heeler Lapponian Herder Large Munsterlander Leonberger Lhasa Apso Löwchen Maltese Manchester Terrier (Standard) Manchester Terrier (Toy) Mastiff Miniature American Shepherd Miniature Bull Terrier Miniature Pinscher Miniature Schnauzer Mountain Cur Mudi Neapolitan Mastiff Nederlandse Kooikerhondje Newfoundland Norfolk Terrier Norrbottenspets Norwegian Buhund Norwegian Elkhound Norwegian Lundehund Norwich Terrier Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever Old English Sheepdog Otterhound Papillon Parson Russell Terrier Pekingese Pembroke Welsh Corgi Perro de Presa Canario Peruvian Inca Orchid Petit Basset Griffon Vendéen Pharaoh Hound Plott Hound Pointer Polish Lowland Sheepdog Pomeranian Pont-Audemer Spaniel Poodle (Miniature) Poodle (Standard) Poodle (Toy) Porcelaine Portuguese Podengo Portuguese Podengo Pequeno Portuguese Pointer Portuguese Sheepdog Portuguese Water Dog Pudelpointer Pug Puli Pumi Pyrenean Mastiff Pyrenean Shepherd Rafeiro do Alentejo Rat Terrier Redbone Coonhound Rhodesian Ridgeback Romanian Carpathian Shepherd Romanian Mioritic Shepherd Dog Rottweiler Russell Terrier Russian Toy Russian Tsvetnaya Bolonka Saint Bernard Saluki Samoyed Schapendoes Schipperke Scottish Deerhound Scottish Terrier Sealyham Terrier Segugio Italiano Shetland Sheepdog Shiba Inu Shih Tzu Shikoku Siberian Husky Silky Terrier Skye Terrier Sloughi Slovakian Wirehaired Pointer Slovensky Cuvac Slovensky Kopov Small Munsterlander Smooth Fox Terrier Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier Spanish Mastiff Spanish Water Dog Spinone Italiano Stabyhoun Staffordshire Bull Terrier Standard Schnauzer Sussex Spaniel Swedish Lapphund Swedish Vallhund Taiwan Dog Teddy Roosevelt Terrier Thai Bangkaew Thai Ridgeback Tibetan Mastiff Tibetan Spaniel Tibetan Terrier Tornjak Tosa Toy Fox Terrier Transylvanian Hound Treeing Tennessee Brindle Treeing Walker Coonhound Vizsla Volpino Italiano Weimaraner Welsh Springer Spaniel Welsh Terrier West Highland White Terrier Wetterhoun Whippet Wire Fox Terrier Wirehaired Pointing Griffon Wirehaired Vizsla Working Kelpie Xoloitzcuintli Yakutian Laika Yorkshire Terrier Explore by characteristic or group Select Characteristic or Group Smallest Dog Breeds Medium Dog Breeds Largest Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds of Dogs Hypoallergenic Dogs Best Family Dogs Best Guard Dogs Best Dog Breeds for Kids Best Dogs for Apartments Hairless Dog Breeds Best Dogs For Apartment Dwellers Large Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds Of Dog Apartment Dogs Sporting Group Hound Group Working Group Terrier Group Toy Group Non-Sporting Group Herding Group Miscellaneous Class Foundation Stock Service Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Compare Breeds Compare up to 5 different breeds side by side Find a Puppy Browse the AKC Marketplace to find the right puppy for you Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Featured Names The Most Popular Dog Names of 2022 Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Dog Name Finder Browse our extensive library of dog names for inspiration Can My Dog Eat____? Find out the best and worst foods for your dog and which to avoid Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products Shop Dog Products Breed-Specific Products Dog Toys & Treats Training Products Dog Gift Packs DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog Register a Purebred Dog Register a Litter Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Registration Downloadable Forms AKC Marketplace Find a Puppy AKC Rescue Network PuppyVisor Search Counselor Breeder Referral Contacts Dog Training Services Canine Good Citizen (CGC) GoodDog Helpline Find a Training Club Health & Dog Care Find a Dog Groomer AKC Pet Insurance AKC Reunite Microchips AKC Veterinary Network AKC S.A.F.E. Grooming Program Breeder Programs & Services Breeder Toolkit Breeder E-Z Reg Breeder Of Merit Program Bred With H.E.A.R.T Program Breeder Education AKC Canine College Browse All Services Featured Products Video Training Consultations PURCHASE NOW GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Match Shows 4-6 Month Beginner Puppy Puppy of Achievement National Owner Handled Series FSS Open Show Companion Sports Agility Obedience Rally Tracking Title Recognition Program Public Service Dog Barn Hunt Disc Dog Diving Dogs Flyball Search & Rescue Parent Club Title Recognition Performance Sports Field Events for Hounds Coursing, CAT & FAST CAT Earthdog Herding & Farm Dog Pointing Breeds Retrievers Scent Work Spaniels & Flushing Breeds Sports for Juniors Junior Showmanship Juniors in Companion Events Juniors in Performance Events PeeWee Special Attractions AKC Family Dog Program CGC & AKC S.T.A.R. Puppy AKC Trick Dog AKC Therapy Dog AKC Fit Dog AKC Temperament Test RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Share: Search Sign In Menu Breeds A-Z View All Breeds Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Compare Breeds Find a Puppy Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Expert Advice Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Dog Name Finder Can My Dog Eat____? Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products & Services Products Shop Dog Products DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog AKC Marketplace Dog Training Services Health & Dog Care Breeder Programs & Services AKC Canine College Browse All Services Sports & Events GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Companion Sports Title Recognition Program Performance Sports Sports for Juniors AKC Family Dog Program RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Clubs & Delegates Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Home Expert Advice Health Fitness & Exercise 6 Things You Can Do to Keep Your Dog Healthy Back To Fitness & Exercise 6 Things You Can Do to Keep Your Dog Healthy By Gary Kane Published: May 11, 2015 | 1 Minute Updated: May 27, 2021 Published: May 11, 2015 | 1 Minute Updated: May 27, 2021 aging responsible dog ownership vaccinations lifespan Basic Care to Ensure Your Dog's Health In addition to your love and companionship, there are measures you should take as a responsible pet owner to keep your dog healthy. Here are six things recommended by veterinarians: Keep your pet at a healthy weight; Exercise your pet; Feed your pet a balanced, nutritious diet; Have your veterinarian examine your pet at least once a year to make sure your pet is healthy and to help detect problems earlier; Vaccinate your pet against potentially deadly diseases such as distemper, parvo, panleukopenia and rabies; Keep your pet free of parasites (fleas, ticks, heartworm, etc.) – consult your veterinarian for the best product for your pet; https://www.akc.org/wp-admin/admin-ajax.php Get Your Free AKC eBook Share a few contact details to get your FREE e-book What are all these vaccines for? Learn about the most common canine diseases that are preventable with vaccines. SUBMIT *Turn off pop-up blocker to download DOWNLOAD E-BOOK *Turn off pop-up blocker to download AKC Privacy Policy AKC is a participant in affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to akc.org. If you purchase a product through this article, we may receive a portion of the sale. TOP Founded in 1884, the not-for-profit AKC is the recognized and trusted expert in breed, health, and training information for all dogs. AKC actively advocates for responsible dog ownership and is dedicated to advancing dog sports. ABOUT US + About AKC Our Mission Our History Minutes & Reports AKC Library & Archives Awards & Honors Press Center Board of Directors & Executive Officers Careers Newsletter Subscriptions Contact Us Top Services + Find a Puppy Find a Dog Groomer Register Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Dog Training Help Shop AKC Store Top Resources + Delegates Portal Downloadable Forms Rules, Regulations & Policies Answer Center Judges' Directory Government Relations Inspections & Compliance Working It Out℠ Guide & FAQs Active Shooter & Mass Attack Safety Resources Get Involved + Attend a Dog Show Participate in an Event Donate to AKC Find a Dog Club AKC Humane Fund Favorite Things + Watch Dog Shows Top 100 Girl Dog Names Top 100 Boy Dog Names Most Popular Dog Breeds Hypoallergenic Dog Breeds Why Do Dogs Eat Poop? Why Is My Dog Limping? How to Remove a Tick How to Potty Train a Puppy CBD Oil for Dogs Best Dog Podcast Best Calming Treats for Dogs Advertise With AKC Terms of Use Privacy & Cookies CA Privacy Rights Website Info & FAQs Linking Policy Material Reproduction Policy © The American Kennel Club, Inc. 2022. All rights reserved. 

Our Other Sites Close Search Our Other Sites Close ENG English Arabic Bengali Chinese Croatian Czech Danish Dutch Finnish French German Greek Hebrew Hindi Hungarian Indonesian Italian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Portuguese Russian Spanish Swedish Turkish Welsh Cat Friendly Clinic Cat Care For Life Shop Donate About Us Our Campaigns Our History Our Awards Meet the Team Our Expert Panels Friends & Partners Careers with Us Annual Review Contact Support Us Make a donation Join Us Cat Cocktail Parties Leave a Legacy Cat Owners & Caregivers Cat Care Advice Cat Carer Guides Inhaler training Courses Unowned Cats Cat Friendly Solutions for Unowned Cats Why we are helping The different needs of cats Feral and street cats Cat Friendly Homing Courses Vets & Nurses About ISFM ISFM Membership Courses Webinars Free Support Congress Congress International Cat Day Search Our Other Sites Back Thinking of getting a cat? 01st October 2018 Having a cat can mean different things to different people. Some want a cat to cuddle and sit on their laps; others are happy to live with a very independent cat which spends most of its time outside and doesn’t want too much human interaction. What is important is that you try to find a cat that will interact with you if you want it to. All cats are not the same and how each individual cat behaves with you can depend on its inherent personality and early experiences (or lack of experiences), which can make it fearful or confident with people and life in general. The environment in which you keep a cat is also extremely significant – for example if it lives with many other cats which do not get on, then it will be stressed and will react differently than if it was on its own. While there is no guaranteed way to choose the perfect cat for you and your lifestyle, understanding your expectations as well as what makes cats tick will help you to bring home a cat that should be able to cope with its new environment and be the pet that you want too. To care for a cat you will need to: Provide plenty of human companionship Provide regular, suitable meals with a constant supply of fresh water Provide a clean and comfortable bed Provide the cat with outdoor access or be prepared to empty and clean a litter tray on a daily basis Provide it with a stimulating and safe environment Groom it regularly. Longhaired cats require daily grooming Have it neutered between 4 and 6 months old Vaccinate against the major feline diseases regularly Worm regularly and provide treatment for fleas Take the cat to the vet when it shows any sign of illness Insure your cat or make sure you can afford the cost of any veterinary treatment it may need How much care and attention does a cat need? As pets go, cats are relatively low maintenance compared to dogs which need companionship, walking, training etc. However, like any pet, they do need care, and some cats need more care than others. Do you want to spend a lot of time with your cat, do you want it to be demanding, or do you have limited time? Cats can fit into busy, modern lifestyles more easily than dogs, as they are pretty independent, can be left alone much more easily and are more suitable for smaller flats or houses. Cats are often chosen by people who have busy and stressful lifestyles and who want some companionship when they go home to relax. What do you want from your relationship with a cat? If you’re the kind of person who really needs to have a close relationship with your cat and to be able to handle it and have it interact with you, then you’ll be disappointed if you take on a nervous cat that hides every time you come into the room. You may want to think about one of the pedigree breeds which can be more interactive and perhaps more needy of human company than some moggies. This may however become a problem for the cat if you are out at work all day and only available to give attention on evenings or weekends. Some cats need to know exactly what’s going to happen when, in order to feel relaxed. Such cats would be quite happy living with an old lady who rarely has visitors and leads a very quiet life, but would probably find it quite stressful living in a home full of kids and other animals with lots of visitors and activity. Other cats, however, might thrive on different interactions with lots of people and fit in perfectly well in a busy household. If you’re not likely to have the time or inclination to groom a cat on a daily basis, don’t even think of getting a Persian or a cat with a long coat. In pedigree jargon, any cat with a longer coat, aside from a Persian, is called semi-longhaired because the coat is not as full as the Persian’s and does not have such a thick undercoat; however, it is still long and requires grooming. In addition, if you are extremely house-proud, you may not want lots of hair everywhere. A shorthaired cat is a much easier option, as most cats are fanatical about their coats and keep them in immaculate condition. That’s not to say that they don’t leave hairs around – bear this in mind if you’re thinking of getting a white cat but have dark furniture, or vice versa. Likewise, a cat is quite likely to sharpen its claws indoors, often on the stair carpet, sometimes on the furniture or even on the wallpaper. Whether your cat does this can depend on the cat itself and also the environment you provide for it; however there are things you can do to try and deal with this, but it is best to acknowledge from the outset that your cat is an animal with free will and natural behaviour that may not suit someone who needs to have an immaculate house. Can I keep a cat on vegetarian food? Are you a vegetarian and want your cat to be one too? If you want a vegetarian pet that won’t challenge your beliefs, then it would be better to get a rabbit – a cat is a carnivore first and foremost, and looks and behaves as it does for just this reason. A cat is what is called an obligate carnivore – it has an absolute need for some of the nutrients found in meat and all of its senses of smell and taste are atuned to being a carnivore – it would be unfair and very dangerous to health to even attempt keeping it as a vegetarian. Feeding your cat or kitten Is there a type of cat which doesn’t hunt? You may have a great aversion to your cat hunting outside. Perhaps you are a bird lover, or are simply unable to deal with small carcases on the floor. Hunting is normal behaviour for cats. Keeping a cat indoors may prevent it actually killing anything, but it will still need an outlet for this, its most instinctive behaviour, and not all cats will be happy with an indoor lifestyle. Likewise, if you’re simply getting a cat to keep vermin at bay, you won’t want to find yourself with one which isn’t especially interested in huntin’, shootin’ and fishin’ and prefers being a couch potato! Older cats are likely to hunt much less than younger ones and some cats don’t bother at all, but there is no easy way to know how a cat will behave. Can I keep a cat indoors? If you think about the lifestyle of a cat which has access outdoors you will realise that being outdoors brings a huge variety to its life and allows it to use all of its hunting behaviours if it wants to. Of course, there are risks outside for cats, but you need to balance these with the very positive aspects of physical and mental stimulation and an outlet for natural behaviour. Indoors versus outdoors Can I have a cat with a baby or young children? There is no reason not to have a cat or kitten if you have children. It is up to parents to teach their children from the very beginning how to approach, stroke and handle cats and to treat them kindly. Many children have fantastic relationships with their cats and learn about respecting other creatures and being gentle – it is done successfully all the time, but it is up to parents to lay down the rules. Perhaps taking on a new kitten when you have a new baby or a toddler might be a lot to handle at once, so ensuring you have time for all the parties is part of a successful relationship. Likewise, if you are pregnant there is no need to get rid of the cat. Simple and basic hygiene precautions and common sense management of the cat, while the baby is small, can ensure all cohabit happily and safely. Should I get an adult cat or a kitten? A kitten gives you the opportunity to take on an animal right from the beginning and treat it and care for it so that it gets the best start in life. You will also be able to get some idea of its character. However, kittens require a lot of attention and some forethought to prevent them from getting into trouble. If you leave them alone you have to make sure they will be safe while you are away. You may also have to organise neutering, initial vaccinations and so on, depending on where you get your kitten from. Where to get a cat or kitten and what to ask While kittens have a huge ‘cute’ factor, it is worth remembering that they don’t stay kittens for very long – just six months out of a potential 14 years or more. With adult cats, it is at least clear if they are long or short haired. You should be able to get a good idea of a cat’s personality, although if it is being kept in less than ideal circumstances and is stressed or frightened it may act very differently compared to when it is relaxed. A confident adult cat is likely to move in and settle down quite quickly; a nervous one may take more time. It will be much easier to leave an older cat alone in the knowledge that it is not going to get itself into trouble, and it will generally be much less hard work and worry than a kitten. An adult cat will probably already be neutered and vaccinated. Choosing an adult cat and where to get one What sex of cat should I get? The sex of a kitten doesn’t really matter, as long as you neuter your kitten before it reaches puberty (at about four months of age) when the influence of sex hormones kick in. Un-neutered cats may exhibit unwelcome reproductive behaviours. For example, un-neutered male cats will mark their territory with strong smelling urine while un-neutered female cats can come into season every two weeks if they do not become pregnant. If you are getting just one cat or kitten, it doesn’t matter which sex you choose. Equally, if you want two kittens and you are getting two from the same litter, the sex of either cat is probably not important. However, if you have a resident cat and are getting just one kitten or another cat, it may be worth considering going for one of the opposite sex to try and remove some of the competition factor. A kitten may be a better option than another adult cat in such cases as the young cat’s immaturity seems to remove this competition factor – for a while anyway during which time you hope they will get to like each other! Neutering also removes the need for so much competition and makes the choice of sex much less important. How to tell what sex a kitten is Should I choose a specific breed or moggie? The majority of cats kept as pets are what we call moggies or domestic short or long haired cats – that is they are a random mixture of lots of different cats, we have often have little idea about their parentage (well the father anyway). This means we have no control over the colour, body shape, coat length or anything else that the kittens can inherit from their parents. So, for example, if your kitten is from a moggie mum but its father is unknown, it may develop a longer coat than you desire if the father was indeed longhaired. There is more to choosing a pedigree cat than just liking a certain coat colour or length – there are ethical considerations with some breeds if you really want to consider the cat’s welfare. There are also health issues which you need to check with the breeder and things you need to ask. Good breeders aim to breed healthy, people-friendly cats and avoid (or seek to deal with) inherited disorders which arise. Pedigree cats – things to consider What breed of cat should I choose? There are many different breeds, some of which will require extra care and attention, for example if they have a very long coat or even no coat at all. (See our A-Z of cat breeds). Some pedigree cats are more people orientated and may not like to be left alone for long periods. If you are out all day at work it may be worth getting two kittens together for company – do your research about the breed you are interested in. Always make sure that health comes first, no matter what the ‘look’. How to choose a kitten Can I have a cat if I have a dog? If you have other pets there should not be a problem in getting a cat, but you just need to make sure that you take everything into consideration. If you have a dog you just need to make sure that you make introductions carefully so that your new cat is not chased or injured while the dog gets used to it. Not all dog types make good companions for cats. How to introduce a new cat or kitten to a resident dog How many cats can I have together? It’s very easy to ‘collect’ cats – they’re addictively beautiful, they’re small and they’re quite easy to care for. Even if they don’t get on, they tend to remove themselves from the situation rather than fight. However, there may be a great deal of tension between cats which owners just don’t pick up on. Cats originate from a largely solitary species and although they can live in groups these are usually related individuals or are self-selected so that cats are not sharing space with cats that they don’t get on with. Cats may start to spray or soil in the house because they’re trying to deal with a situation where they feel under stress because of other cats, and this might be all that owners notice. If you have two cats living together very successfully then think very carefully before you add more. If you have three cats living well together then thank your stars and quit while you’re ahead! The trouble with adding more is that it might not be just the relationship between the resident cats and the new one that causes problems; it may upset the whole equilibrium of the resident cats’ relationship and introduce difficulties even between the original cats as tension and stress levels rise. Any new cat needs careful introduction. How to introduce a new adult cat to your cat. The best way to have two compatible cats is to choose siblings. These will have grown up together, and this usually bodes well for a good future relationship (although never guaranteed!). What does it cost to keep a cat? If you are buying a pedigree cat then there will be associated costs and these may be quite large. Pedigree kittens usually come vaccinated and in some cases already neutered. If you are getting a cat from a rescue organisation then they may ask for a donation or a fee and again it will probably come already neutered and vaccinated. Kittens or cats from friends or neighbours don’t usually come neutered or vaccinated, wormed, treated for fleas or anything else and it will be up to you to register with a vet and get these things done. Neutering is obviously a one-off cost, but several vaccinations will be required to make sure that a kitten is protected from infectious diseases; thereafter a regular booster vaccination will help to protect it during its life (requirements depend on the cat’s lifestyle and risks associated with that – your vet can advise you). Then there is food, preventive health care regarding treatment for fleas and ticks and worms, cat litter if you want or need an indoor litter tray, beds and grooming equipment if you take on a longhaired cat. Microchipping is also recommended in case your cat goes missing. We recommend that you also insure your cat so that if an accident or illness happens then you do not have to worry about the costs. Choose your insurance carefully to make sure you get what you expect or need. I am allergic to cats – is there any breed which is better than others? Many people think it’s a cat’s hair that causes us to react to them by sneezing, wheezing or itching. In fact it’s a protein or allergen called Fd1, present in feline saliva, which causes the allergy. Because cats groom themselves regularly they have saliva all over their coat. This dries on the coat and when the cat scratches, moves or brushes past objects the dust or dander and the hairs which contain the allergen are spread about. Cat-lovers who really want to have a cat but are allergic sometimes think that by choosing a breed with less, little or no coat they can avoid the problem. However, as it is saliva that causes the problem, this is unlikely to help, and although longhaired cats do seem to cause more allergic reactions that’s probably only because, having more hair, they’re also covered with more allergen. It’s worth trying out different cats by visiting friends with cats to see if they elicit less of an allergic reaction. Unfortunately it’s a very difficult problem to get around for people who react or who have family members who are allergic. What should I do with my cat when I go on holiday? If you go away on holiday you also need to consider who is going to look after your cat. If you are only away for a day or two you can ask a neighbour to pop in and feed it and check it is OK. If you are away for more than this you may want to consider a boarding cattery, as many cats may wander looking for company. If you have a nervous cat it may hide when the feeder comes and he or she may not be able to be sure that everything is all right. A good boarding cattery will keep your cat safe and you can relax while you are away. There are bad boarding catteries however. How to choose a good boarding cattery When should I get a new cat? If you are considering getting a new cat or kitten, choose a time when it is quiet in your house (not in the middle of a family celebration etc) and perhaps when you have a day or two when you can help it to settle in and be there while it finds its way around, not just before you go on holiday etc. Where do I get a cat from and how do I choose it? Once you have thought about the responsibilities and costs of keeping a cat and what type you want, then consider where you are going to get it and how you are going to choose your cat or kitten. The Kitten Checklist The Kitten Checklist has been put together by 20 animal and veterinary organisations, to help you make an informed decision when choosing a kitten. It will help you find a healthy, friendly kitten and avoid some of the pitfalls which can occur. View/download The Kitten Checklist Thank you for visiting our website, we hope you have found our information useful. All our advice is freely accessible to everyone, wherever you are in the world. However, as a charity, we need your support to enable us to keep delivering high quality and up to date information for everyone. Please consider making a contribution, big or small, to keep our content free, accurate and relevant. Support International Cat Care from as little £3 Thank you. Donate Now Spread the Word Twitter Facebook Linkedin Join the iCatCare Community Sign up to our monthly newsletter and free e-magazine Intelligent Cat Care Sign Up Previous Why do cats struggle to see objects close up? Next How to encourage your cat to eat Who we are Meet the Team Friends & Partners Careers with Us Learn about cats Cat Care Advice Blog Education & Events Quick Links Press & Media Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Join the iCatCare Community Sign up to our monthly charity newsletter Sign Up Reg Charity 1117342 (England and Wales) Place Farm, Court Street, Tisbury, Wiltshire, SP3 6LW © 2023 International Cat Care Search iCatCare.org You are now being re-directed to an external website – www.thecatgallery.co.uk The Cat Gallery has partnered with International Cat Care to host the charity’s online shop and manage the distribution of shop bought goods to customers. iCatCare may receive a commission or share in the net profit of some purchases made through the affiliate links. Thank you for supporting International Cat Care through your shop purchases! Your purchase directly supports the leading global cat welfare charity, International Cat Care. They provide cat owners, veterinary professionals and those who live and work with cats the resources, support, and advice they need to better care for cats. Continue to shop We use cookies to improve our website to make sure you have a better browsing experience. For more information, please see our Privacy Policy. Continue 

QuizzesRANDOMLOG IN Log in Social login does not work in incognito and private browsers. Please log in with your username or email to continue. Facebook Google wikiHow Account No account yet? Create an account EXPLORE Tech Help ProAbout UsRandom ArticleQuizzes Request a New ArticleCommunity DashboardThis Or That Game Popular Categories Arts and EntertainmentArtworkBooksMoviesComputers and ElectronicsComputersPhone SkillsTechnology HacksHealthMen's HealthMental HealthWomen's HealthRelationshipsDatingLoveRelationship Issues Hobbies and CraftsCraftsDrawingGamesEducation & CommunicationCommunication SkillsPersonal DevelopmentStudyingPersonal Care and StyleFashionHair CarePersonal HygieneYouthPersonal CareSchool StuffDating All Categories Arts and EntertainmentFinance and BusinessHome and GardenRelationship Quizzes Cars & Other VehiclesFood and EntertainingPersonal Care and StyleSports and Fitness Computers and ElectronicsHealthPets and AnimalsTravel Education & CommunicationHobbies and CraftsPhilosophy and ReligionWork World Family LifeHolidays and TraditionsRelationshipsYouth EDIT Edit this Article QUIZZESPRO Courses Guides New Tech Help Pro Expert Videos About wikiHow Pro Upgrade Sign In HomeRandomBrowse ArticlesLearn Something NewGuidesCoursesQuizzesNewPlay GamesThis Or That GameNewTrain Your BrainExplore MoreSupport wikiHowAbout wikiHowLog in / Sign upTerms of Use wikiHow is where trusted research and expert knowledge come together. Learn why people trust wikiHow CategoriesPets and AnimalsCatsHow to Take Care of a Cat Download Article Explore this Article methods 1 Housetraining 2 Feeding 3 Health 4 Choosing a Cat Should I Get My Cat Spayed? Foods to Provide and Avoid Giving Your Cat + Show 3 more... - Show less... Other Sections Expert Q&A VideoWATCH NOW Tips and Warnings Related Articles References Article Summary Co-authored by Molly DeVoss Last Updated: September 22, 2023 References Approved Download Article ARTICLE VIDEO X This article was co-authored by Molly DeVoss. Molly DeVoss is a Certified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist (CFTBS), a Certified Cat Behavior Consultant (CCBC), a Fear Free Certified Trainer (FFCT), and the Founder of Cat Behavior Solutions. Molly specializes in using positive reinforcement to modify and prevent unwanted behaviors in cats and reduce cat shelter surrender. Molly has sat on the Dallas Animal Advisory committee since 2013 and was voted one of the Top 12 Extraordinary Cat Behaviorists of 2020 by Catpetclub.com. She is certified by both the Animal Behavior Institute and the International Association of Animal Behavior Consultants. She is also the host of the weekly podcast Cat Talk Radio. There are 20 references cited in this article, which can be found at the bottom of the page. wikiHow marks an article as reader-approved once it receives enough positive feedback. This article received 43 testimonials and 90% of readers who voted found it helpful, earning it our reader-approved status. This article has been viewed 642,212 times. With their playful personalities, affectionate behavior, and adorable faces, cats can be the ideal pet. But, despite popular opinion, cats are not maintenance-free! To keep your cat healthy and happy, you need to know how to take care of and provide the best possible life for your new furry friend. Steps Method 1 Method 1 of 4: Housetraining Download Article {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/0\/08\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-1-Version-4.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-1-Version-4.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/0\/08\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-1-Version-4.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-1-Version-4.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 1 Encourage the cat to use a litter box.[1] X Research source Feline Internal Medicine Secrets. Michael R. Lappin, DVM, PhD. Hanley and Belfus, Inc. 2001 Most cats will prefer the litter box to other parts of the house because of the texture of the litter.[2] X Expert Source Molly DeVossCertified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist & Certified Cat Behavior Consultant Expert Interview. 28 June 2021. But, there are still steps you need to take to make sure you're offering the litter box as the best place to use the bathroom. Place the box in a quiet spot where the cat won’t be bothered by people, dogs, or loud noises. To keep the litter box clean, make sure you scoop the litter daily, and clean the box weekly. You should also replace or refresh the litter at least once a week.[3] X Research source Litter Box Preference in Domestic cats: Covered Versus Uncovered. E.K. Grigg, et al. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery April 2013 vol. 15 no. 4 280-284 Provide enough litter boxes for more than one cat. A good rule of thumb is to have one box for each cat, plus one more. For example, if you have two cats, you need three litter boxes in different areas of the home. One cat might try to intimidate a less dominate cat away from using a single box. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/a\/a4\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-2-Version-5.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-2-Version-5.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/a\/a4\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-2-Version-5.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-2-Version-5.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 2 Make the litter box a comfortable place. Don't frighten or startle your cat when they're using the box, or they may form a bad association with the box and start avoiding it. Buy a large box, even if you have to spend a little money on it. Cats are more comfortable in a larger (in area, not height) box.[4] X Research source Litterbox Size Preference in Domestic Cats (Felis catus). N.C. Guy, et al. Journal of Veterinary Behavior-Clinical Applications and Research. March–April, 2014Volume 9, Issue 2, Pages 78–82 Don’t switch brands of litter on your cat, because cats don’t like sudden change. Switching from a clay litter to a clumping litter or vice versa might upset the cat and cause them to avoid using the litter box. Don’t use heavily scented litters for the same reason. Advertisement {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/2\/2e\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-3-Version-4.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-3-Version-4.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/2\/2e\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-3-Version-4.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-3-Version-4.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 3 Take young or old cats needs into consideration. Keep in mind that kittens and older cats with arthritis or other health problems may have problems getting in and out of a box that's too tall. Use low-height boxes in an easily accessible area for kittens and cats with special needs, or buy an adjustable litter box.[5] X Expert Source Molly DeVossCertified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist & Certified Cat Behavior Consultant Expert Interview. 28 June 2021. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/7\/78\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-4-Version-4.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-4-Version-4.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/7\/78\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-4-Version-4.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-4-Version-4.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 4 Provide the cat with a scratching post. Scratching is a normal part of cat behavior, and there's no way you can train it out of them. Your cat will need one or two scratching posts to keep them from scratching up furniture, woodwork, and so on. By providing a post, you allow the cat to indulge in normal, healthy behavior.[6] X Research source Canine and Feline Behavior for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses. Edited by Julie Shaw and Debbie Martin. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc. 2015 Don't declaw your cat. This will cause far more problems than it will solve, and it may paralyze your cat or make them unable to walk. Cats have their claws for a reason. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/c\/c6\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-5-Version-4.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-5-Version-4.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/c\/c6\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-5-Version-4.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-5-Version-4.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 5 Discourage the cat from exploring forbidden surfaces. Cats are curious, and will jump on counters or other places you'd like them to steer clear of. Scat mats, a perfectly timed mist of water from a spray bottle, or even a stern “no” can correct this behavior.[7] X Expert Source Molly DeVossCertified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist & Certified Cat Behavior Consultant Expert Interview. 28 June 2021. With time and patience, you can teach your cat to stay away from your protected areas. You can also use a rattle can (an empty soda can filled with a few pebbles and the opening taped over). Toss it gently on the ground to scare a cat away from forbidden surfaces. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/1\/1c\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-6-Version-4.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-6-Version-4.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/1\/1c\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-6-Version-4.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-6-Version-4.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 6 Consider using feline pheromone products. These products, which fill the air with calming synthetic pheromones, come as sprays or diffusers that plug into electrical outlets.[8] X Research source Clinical Trial of a Feline Pheromone Analogue for Feline Urine Marking. Niwako Ogata and Yukari Takeuch. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science Vol. 63 (2001) No. 2 P 157-161 They can help resolve litter box or scratching issues, and have also been proven to calm stressed or anxious cats. Advertisement Method 2 Method 2 of 4: Feeding Download Article {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/5\/57\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-7-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-7-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/5\/57\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-7-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-7-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 1 Decide what type of food to feed your cat. Cat food comes in a vast array of types: dry food, semi-moist, and canned are the common types. Dry food is easily and efficiently stored, but cats go wild for the taste of semi-moist and canned foods. The latter types can add more fluid to the cat’s diet than dry foods. In general, food type comes down to owner preference. Occasionally, a cat with a medical condition might need one type over another. Consult your veterinarian for recommendations. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/8\/86\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-8-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-8-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/8\/86\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-8-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-8-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 2 Choose a good brand of cat food. Like other animals, cats have some specific nutritional needs. They are "obligate carnivores," which means they need animal proteins to avoid severe health consequences.[9] X Research source Differences between cats and dogs: a nutritional view. 7. Veronique Legrand-Defretin (1994). Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 53, pp 15-24. doi:10.1079/PNS19940004. Ask your vet for suggestions about a good quality food. Cheaper products may not provide enough nutrition to keep your cat happy and healthy. Look for cat foods that list large amounts of animal meat like beef, chicken, turkey, or fish.[10] X Research source Also look for important amino acids like taurine and arginine and fatty acids like arachidonic and linoleic acid.[11] X Research source Avoid feeding your cat human foods unless you have cleared the food with your veterinarian. Some human foods can make a cat severely sick or are even toxic to cats (e.g., chocolate). {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/4\/4a\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-9-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-9-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/4\/4a\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-9-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-9-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 3 Follow your cat food's suggested feeding guide.[12] X Trustworthy Source American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Leading organization dedicated to the prevention of animal cruelty Go to source In general, cats are fed according to age, weight and activity levels. They prefer to eat frequent, small meals throughout the day.[13] X Research source The Evolutionary Basis for the Feeding Behavior of Domestic Dogs (Canis familiaris) and Cats (Felis catus) John W.S. Bradshaw The Journal of Nutrition. July 2006 vol. 136 no. 7 1927S-1931S Ask your vet for recommendations on what and how to feed your cat if you have any reservations. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/c\/cd\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-10-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-10-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/c\/cd\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-10-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-10-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 4 Don't overfeed your cat. Follow your veterinarian's recommendations closely and make sure your cat gets plenty of exercise, as obesity is one of the biggest health issues facing cats today. Obese cats are more likely to develop diabetes when they approach middle age. Extra weight also contributes to arthritis, heart disease, and other health problems in cats.[14] X Research source The Growing Problem of Obesity in Dogs and Cats. Alexander J. German. The Journal of Nutrition. July 2006 vol. 136 no. 7 1940S-1946S Advertisement Method 3 Method 3 of 4: Health Download Article {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/7\/71\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-11-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-11-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/7\/71\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-11-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-11-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 1 Brush your cat depending on their coat needs. You may think that because cats seem to groom themselves, you don't need to brush them. But you do need to brush long-hair cats several times a week and short-hair cats weekly. This will help reduce shedding in your home and also help the cat avoid the dreaded hairballs. For cats that tend to shed (long-haired ones especially), use a comb that has fine strands of metal. This gets deep into the undercoat and eliminates shedding. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/7\/76\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-12-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-12-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/7\/76\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-12-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-12-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 2 Check the cat for skin conditions as you brush. Be on the lookout for any fleas or other parasites, and for any unusual redness, lumps, bumps, or other skin problems. If you see anything suspicious, let your veterinarian know and ask for advice on how you should take care of it. Make sure to check the underbelly of a cat with your hands. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/a\/af\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-13-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-13-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/a\/af\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-13-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-13-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 3 Schedule yearly vet visits.[15] X Research source Feline Medicine and Therapeutics. E. A. Chandler, R. M. Gaskell, and C. J. Gaskel. Blackwell Publishing. 2004. Just like any member of the family, a cat needs regular medical visits. Unlike human children, cats can't let us know when they're not feeling well. They rely on their humans to take them to a veterinarian for regular medical examinations to keep them healthy. It is important that a cat sees a vet at least once a year, for a physical check-up: teeth, ears, eyes, heart, booster vaccinations, and deflea/deworm treatments. All cat owners should consider getting their pet vaccinated against the following: feline infectious enteritis (FIE), cat ‘flu and feline leukemia virus (FeLV). All can kill cats if they become infected and so it is important to protect your pet. You may also find that a cattery will not accept your pet, should you need their services, without proof of these and potentially other vaccinations. Your vet can advise exactly what vaccinations are required for your pet. If you are at all concerned about your cat’s health or behaviour you should see your vet as soon as possible. Older cats might need to see a veterinarian twice yearly for optimal health. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/9\/91\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-14-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-14-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/9\/91\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-14-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-14-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 4 Visit the vet more frequently for kittens. Just like human babies, kittens need to see the vet more often than adult cats. Starting at around 8 weeks of age, they'll need 2-3 visits to have their vaccination series and worm treatments. At minimum, this includes the feline distemper vaccine and a rabies vaccine. Your vet will discuss the benefits of optional vaccinations as well. Ask about the risks of diseases like feline leukemia and make an informed decision about which vaccinations you want. The vet will also check the kitten for fleas and ear mites, and treat them if needed. Make sure the kitten gets worm treatment. Most kittens have roundworms that can stunt growth and potentially be transmitted to humans. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/0\/0d\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-15-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-15-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/0\/0d\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-15-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-15-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 5 Get your cat spayed or neutered (or "fixed"). Spaying a female cat or neutering a male cat has many positive benefits. It will cut down on unwanted behaviors like roaming and the tendency to spray urine. Physically, it protects against unwanted pregnancies and diseases like pyometra, and it reduces the risk of testicular, uterine, and ovarian cancer. The most important thing, though, is that it cuts down on the number of unwanted kittens in the world! Ask your vet for a recommendation on when to get kittens spayed or neutered. In general, vets recommend a range from 2-6 months. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/a\/a8\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-16-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-16-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/a\/a8\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-16-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-16-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 6 Get the cat used to tooth brushing. Cats can and do suffer from dental disease. To brush your cat's teeth, you need a soft-bristled toothbrush and veterinary toothpaste. Never use human toothpaste — too much fluoride can upset your cat's stomach, and with the high fluoride concentration in human toothpaste, too much could be toxic. Start by offering them a taste of the veterinary toothpaste. The next time, let them taste the toothpaste, and then run your finger along the gums of the upper teeth. Repeat the process with the toothbrush. Get the bristles of the brush along the gum line of the upper back teeth and angle slightly up, so the bristles get under the gum line. Work from back to front, making small circles along the gum lines. It should take you less than 30 seconds to brush your pet's teeth. Do not try to brush the entire mouth at first. If they only let you brush the outside of their upper teeth, it's better than nothing. You're still addressing the most important area of dental disease prevention. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/4\/40\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-17-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-17-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/4\/40\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-17-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-17-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 7 Schedule professional tooth cleaning if needed. Even with the best tooth brushing, some cats may still need an occasional professional cleaning. While brushing reduces the plaque and buildup on the visible surfaces of the teeth it cannot get to the buildup just under the gum line. A professional cleaning also gives the vet a chance to fully examine your cat's mouth under sedation. Some signs of dental disease include: Bad breath Loose teeth Discolored teeth or teeth covered in tartar Sensitivity or pain in the mouth Bleeding Drooling a lot or dropping food while trying to eat Loss of appetite or weight loss {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/1\/1c\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-18-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-18-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/1\/1c\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-18-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-18-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 8 Make sure your cat gets enough play time. Your cat needs interaction with you daily to keep them happy and physically fit. Use cat toys, talking, and grooming as chances to spend time together. Laser pointers, balls, play mice, and feather toys are also good ways to engage your cat in play. Here's a game you can play with your cat: Try hiding a treat somewhere and using a laser pointer to guide you cat to the treat. Make the laser pointer move in a way that a real mice would move, try pointing it in small places and under hiding spots. Bring the laser pointer to the treat. This will make the cat feel like its hunting and it will be rewarded in the end! Advertisement Method 4 Method 4 of 4: Choosing a Cat Download Article {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/d\/d8\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-19-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-19-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/d\/d8\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-19-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-19-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 1 Decide if you want a kitten or a full-grown cat.[16] X Research source Kittens are adorably tempting, but be honest with yourself about whether you'll be able to match that energy level, and handle that level of responsibility. Shelters are full of loving adult cats who have a much harder time getting adopted. An adult cat will be calmer and quieter than a kitten, but may also have behavioral issues from its early life. Adult cats may also have medical conditions you'll have to address sooner than you would with a kitten. Also, kittens often scratch very painfully; Decide if you want that. {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/2\/2a\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-20-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-20-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/2\/2a\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-20-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-20-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 2 Consider medical concerns that may come with a specific cat. If you have your eye on one cat, in particular, ask about its medical history to see if it requires any long-term care. Would you be able to afford this cat's medical needs? Even if the cat is healthy, consider their breed. Purebred cats of different breeds can have their own genetic problems to overcome. For example, flat-faced cats like Persians and Scottish folds often develop breathing issues, and Manx cats are prone to back problems.[17] X Research source Purebred cats are more likely to have genetic medical problems than non-pedigreed cats.[18] X Research source {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/9\/98\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-21-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-21-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/9\/98\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-21-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-21-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 3 Consider the amount of time you have for a cat. While a cat doesn't need daily walking like a dog, don't be fooled into thinking that cats and kittens aren't a time commitment. They're still active pets that need a lot of play, and affectionate companions who demand attention. You'll also spend time cleaning the litter box and giving the cat structured meals. The average lifespan of an indoor cat is 13-17 years, so be aware that you're making a long-term commitment to a new family member.[19] X Trustworthy Source American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Leading organization dedicated to the prevention of animal cruelty Go to source {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/d\/de\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-22-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-22-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/d\/de\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-22-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-22-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 4 Calculate whether you can afford a cat. The one-time purchase fee for a cat can range from $45 for a shelter adoption to several hundred dollars for a purebred cat. Beyond that, though, you'll have to pay for food, litter, toys, and regular medical expenses. The ASPCA estimates that in the first year of owning a cat, you will likely spend about $1,035 on them.[20] X Trustworthy Source American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Leading organization dedicated to the prevention of animal cruelty Go to source (That amount goes down after you've bought the major equipment and had your initial medical procedures.) {"smallUrl":"https:\/\/www.wikihow.com\/images\/thumb\/6\/6e\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-23-Version-3.jpg\/v4-460px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-23-Version-3.jpg","bigUrl":"\/images\/thumb\/6\/6e\/Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-23-Version-3.jpg\/aid1101379-v4-728px-Take-Care-of-a-Cat-Step-23-Version-3.jpg","smallWidth":460,"smallHeight":345,"bigWidth":728,"bigHeight":546,"licensing":"<div class=\"mw-parser-output\"><p>\u00a9 2023 wikiHow, Inc. All rights reserved. wikiHow, Inc. is the copyright holder of this image under U.S. and international copyright laws. This image is <b>not<\/b> licensed under the Creative Commons license applied to text content and some other images posted to the wikiHow website. This image may not be used by other entities without the express written consent of wikiHow, Inc.<br>\n<\/p><p><br \/>\n<\/p><\/div>"} 5 Consider adopting a cat from an animal shelter. The cost is minimal considering what you get: a fully vaccinated, health examined, and spayed or neutered cat.[21] X Trustworthy Source Animal Humane Society Leading animal welfare nonprofit organization providing medical care, training education, and resources for animal owners Go to source Any “free” cat is ultimately going to cost you those things down the line, if you're a responsible cat owner. Advertisement Should I Get My Cat Spayed? .By using this service, some information may be shared with YouTube. Download Article Foods to Provide and Avoid Giving Your Cat Foods Cats Can Eat Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Cat Expert Q&A Search Add New Question Question How should you split your time with the cat if you have family members? Pippa Elliott, MRCVS Veterinarian Dr. Elliott, BVMS, MRCVS is a veterinarian with over 30 years of experience in veterinary surgery and companion animal practice. She graduated from the University of Glasgow in 1987 with a degree in veterinary medicine and surgery. She has worked at the same animal clinic in her hometown for over 20 years. Pippa Elliott, MRCVS Veterinarian Expert Answer Cats need love and attention just like we do, but won't always demand it. This means you can chose the time to concentrate on the cat and give your undivided attention. Try and incorporate two five-minute play sessions into each day, a few minutes each day to groom the cat, and then speak and fuss the cat at mealtimes. Aside from that it only takes a few seconds for an ear or chin rub when the cat strolls by, but your cat will really appreciate the extra affection. Thanks! We're glad this was helpful. Thank you for your feedback. As a small thank you, we’d like to offer you a $30 gift card (valid at GoNift.com). Use it to try out great new products and services nationwide without paying full price—wine, food delivery, clothing and more. Enjoy! Claim Your Gift If wikiHow has helped you, please consider a small contribution to support us in helping more readers like you. We’re committed to providing the world with free how-to resources, and even $1 helps us in our mission. Support wikiHow Yes No Not Helpful 26 Helpful 228 Question Which breed of cat we should choose? Pippa Elliott, MRCVS Veterinarian Dr. Elliott, BVMS, MRCVS is a veterinarian with over 30 years of experience in veterinary surgery and companion animal practice. She graduated from the University of Glasgow in 1987 with a degree in veterinary medicine and surgery. She has worked at the same animal clinic in her hometown for over 20 years. Pippa Elliott, MRCVS Veterinarian Expert Answer This is a great question to ask and it's super to put thought into which type of cat is best suited to your household. Different cat breeds have different personalities, so the first thing is to decide what type of traits you want your cat to have. For example, a single older person might prefer a lapcat to cuddle and fuss, whilst a young family need a bombproof cat who loves to play and isn't phased by activity and noise. Write down a list of what your ideal cat would do e.g. playful, outgoing, loving or likes only one person, intelligent, easy to train. Then do some research online as to whether your preferred breed has those characteristics or not. Happily, there is a breed to match most people's ideal, so enjoy your research! Thanks! We're glad this was helpful. Thank you for your feedback. As a small thank you, we’d like to offer you a $30 gift card (valid at GoNift.com). Use it to try out great new products and services nationwide without paying full price—wine, food delivery, clothing and more. Enjoy! Claim Your Gift If wikiHow has helped you, please consider a small contribution to support us in helping more readers like you. We’re committed to providing the world with free how-to resources, and even $1 helps us in our mission. Support wikiHow Yes No Not Helpful 31 Helpful 197 Ask a Question 200 characters left Include your email address to get a message when this question is answered. Submit Advertisement Video Read Video Transcript Tips For a fun treat, buy some catnip and pour a tiny pile onto a tile or hard floor (don't use on carpet unless you plan to vacuum!) Cats love catnip! They will frequently roll around in it, or eat it. Warning: cats sometimes get very active after exposure to catnip. It's harmless and a lot of fun. Thanks Helpful 22 Not Helpful 0 Milk can upset a cat's stomach; water is the best fluid to give to your cat. Thanks Helpful 26 Not Helpful 2 Ask your local vet to insert a tracking chip in your cat. This will make it easier to find your cat and track it down in case it gets lost. Thanks Helpful 18 Not Helpful 3 Show More Tips Advertisement Warnings Never use products intended for other animals on your cat. Thanks Helpful 47 Not Helpful 4 Never abandon a cat if you don't want them anymore. Always take unwanted animals to an animal shelter or a trusted friend. They will take your cat and try to find a good home for them. Abandoning animals is cruel. Thanks Helpful 11 Not Helpful 0 If you play with your cat for a long time, make sure they have access to water. Thanks Helpful 10 Not Helpful 0 Don't make them do things against their will such as: Randomly picking them up whenever you like Squeezing them really tight Thanks Helpful 0 Not Helpful 0 Never declaw your cat, as it is equivalent to cutting a person's finger off at the first knuckle. It causes lifelong pain and makes the cat vulnerable to injury (if a predator attacks them). [22] X Research source Alternatives to declawing include providing scratching posts, trimming claws, and using cat nail caps.[23] X Research source Thanks Helpful 0 Not Helpful 0 Advertisement You Might Also Like How toTake Care of Your Pet How toTake Care of Kittens How toCare for a Cat with Feline Leukemia How toTake Care of a Stray Cat How toTell if a Cat Still Has Kittens Inside How toHelp a Cat Cough Up a Hairball How toPet a Cat How toGet an Escaped House Cat to Come Home How toConvince Your Parents to Let You Get a Cat (Teens) How to Care for Nursing Cats and Their Kittens Why Is My Cat Licking Its Fur Off? How to Stop Overgrooming in Cats How toBreed Cats How toKeep a Stray Cat Away from Your Cat How toAttract Cats Advertisement References ↑ Feline Internal Medicine Secrets. Michael R. Lappin, DVM, PhD. Hanley and Belfus, Inc. 2001 ↑ Molly DeVoss. Certified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist & Certified Cat Behavior Consultant. Expert Interview. 28 June 2021. ↑ Litter Box Preference in Domestic cats: Covered Versus Uncovered. E.K. Grigg, et al. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery April 2013 vol. 15 no. 4 280-284 ↑ Litterbox Size Preference in Domestic Cats (Felis catus). N.C. Guy, et al. Journal of Veterinary Behavior-Clinical Applications and Research. March–April, 2014Volume 9, Issue 2, Pages 78–82 ↑ Molly DeVoss. Certified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist & Certified Cat Behavior Consultant. Expert Interview. 28 June 2021. ↑ Canine and Feline Behavior for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses. Edited by Julie Shaw and Debbie Martin. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2015 ↑ Molly DeVoss. Certified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist & Certified Cat Behavior Consultant. Expert Interview. 28 June 2021. ↑ Clinical Trial of a Feline Pheromone Analogue for Feline Urine Marking. Niwako Ogata and Yukari Takeuch. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science Vol. 63 (2001) No. 2 P 157-161 ↑ Differences between cats and dogs: a nutritional view. 7. Veronique Legrand-Defretin (1994). Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 53, pp 15-24. doi:10.1079/PNS19940004. More References (14) ↑ http://www.petmd.com/cat/slideshows/nutrition-center/choosing-best-cat-food ↑ http://www.peteducation.com/article.cfm?c=1+2230&aid=2660 ↑ https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/cat-care/feeding-your-adult-cat ↑ The Evolutionary Basis for the Feeding Behavior of Domestic Dogs (Canis familiaris) and Cats (Felis catus) John W.S. Bradshaw The Journal of Nutrition. July 2006 vol. 136 no. 7 1927S-1931S ↑ The Growing Problem of Obesity in Dogs and Cats. Alexander J. German. The Journal of Nutrition. July 2006 vol. 136 no. 7 1940S-1946S ↑ Feline Medicine and Therapeutics. E. A. Chandler, R. M. Gaskell, and C. J. Gaskel. Blackwell Publishing. 2004. ↑ http://www.adoptapet.com/blog/adopting-a-cat-or-a-kitten-which-is-better-for-me/ ↑ http://www.worldofdani.com/healthproblemsextremepersiansen2.htm ↑ http://www.icatcare.org/advice/cat-breeds/inherited-disorders-cats ↑ https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/cat-care/general-cat-care ↑ https://www.aspca.org/adopt/pet-care-costs ↑ http://www.animalhumanesociety.org/adopt/adoption-fees ↑ https://www.peta.org/living/companion-animals/8-reasons-never-declaw-cats/ ↑ https://www.peta.org/living/companion-animals/8-reasons-never-declaw-cats/ About This Article Co-authored by: Molly DeVoss Certified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist & Certified Cat Behavior Consultant This article was co-authored by Molly DeVoss. Molly DeVoss is a Certified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist (CFTBS), a Certified Cat Behavior Consultant (CCBC), a Fear Free Certified Trainer (FFCT), and the Founder of Cat Behavior Solutions. Molly specializes in using positive reinforcement to modify and prevent unwanted behaviors in cats and reduce cat shelter surrender. Molly has sat on the Dallas Animal Advisory committee since 2013 and was voted one of the Top 12 Extraordinary Cat Behaviorists of 2020 by Catpetclub.com. She is certified by both the Animal Behavior Institute and the International Association of Animal Behavior Consultants. She is also the host of the weekly podcast Cat Talk Radio. This article has been viewed 642,212 times. 4 votes - 90% Co-authors: 149 Updated: September 22, 2023 Views: 642,212 Categories: Featured Articles | Cats Article SummaryXCaring for a cat is highly rewarding and fairly easy, especially when compared to other pets. Feed your cat a high-quality cat food twice a day, and always leave a bowl of fresh water out so that your cat can drink when it's thirsty. You'll also need to put out a litter box so your cat has somewhere to go to the bathroom. Place it in a quiet area of your home, and clean it daily to prevent odors and encourage your cat to use it. To bond with your feline friend, get a variety of cat toys for it to play with, like a wand with feathers on it and a ball that rattles. Many cats also enjoy chasing laser pointers. Play with your cat for at least 10 minutes a day to keep it active and happy. You should also provide it with some scratching posts so it doesn't scratch up your furniture. While you might be tempted to let your cat outside, the Humane Society recommends keeping cats indoors to protect them from predators, disease, and injuries. Indoor cats tend to live longer and stay healthier than outdoor cats. Remember to take your cat to the vet at least once per year to have it examined and vaccinated. For tips on housetraining your cat, keep reading! Did this summary help you?YesNo In other languages Español:cuidar un gato Italiano:Prenderti Cura di un Gatto Русский:заботиться о кошке Deutsch:Sich um eine Katze kümmern Français:prendre soin d'un chat Tiếng Việt:Chăm sóc Mèo 日本語:猫の世話をする Nederlands:Voor een kat zorgen العربية:الاهتمام بقطة 한국어:고양이를 돌보는 법 ไทย:วิธีการเลี้ยงแมว Čeština:Jak se starat o kočku Bahasa Indonesia:Memelihara Kucing 中文:照料猫咪 हिन्दी:बिल्ली की देखभाल करें (Take Care of a Cat) Print Send fan mail to authors Thanks to all authors for creating a page that has been read 642,212 times. Reader Success Stories Anonymous Jun 19 "Thank you for your guide." More reader stories Hide reader stories Share your story Did this article help you? Yes No Advertisement Cookies make wikiHow better. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our cookie policy. Co-authored by: Molly DeVoss Certified Feline Training and Behavior Specialist & Certified Cat Behavior Consultant Co-authors: 149 Updated: September 22, 2023 Views: 642,212 90% of readers found this article helpful. 4 votes - 90% Click a star to add your vote % of people told us that this article helped them. Anonymous Jun 19 "Thank you for your guide." TotallyA CatLover Aug 25, 2021 "I have been having cats my whole life like 8 cats my whole life. I didn't even know about some of this. It really helped me and my cat a lot. And especially because he goes outside a lot. He gets hurt a lot. We make plenty of appointments but this, this right here helps so much. Thank you!"..." more Rated this article: Anna Hernandz Mar 6, 2018 "I have a female cat which my granddaughter fostered and decided to adopt from Ft Lauderdale and she is now with me in New Jersey. Your article has helped me learned about alot of things which I have been doing since I already owned a cat years ago. Very good article."..." more Dara Moh'd Oct 9, 2017 "My father is getting 2 cats in a few days, but he doesn't know how to take care of them. He lives overseas, he lives alone and he works, so he wanted to know how to groom, play, feed, and treat them. This helped a lot. Thanks. "..." more Anonymous Jan 20, 2018 "I have 3 cats, and this helped me to know how to care for them properly. Some of the tips were fantastic! I am also doing a project on this, and my content was marked as 100% and I got an A+. Thanks so much!"..." more Rated this article: Share yours! More success stories Hide success stories QuizzesAm I a Narcissist or an Empath QuizTake QuizDoes He Like Me QuizTake QuizWhat Is My Aesthetic QuizTake QuizAm I Gay QuizTake QuizWhy Can't I Sleep QuizTake QuizZodiac Compatibility QuizTake Quiz You Might Also LikeHow toTake Care of Your PetHow toTake Care of KittensHow toCare for a Cat with Feline LeukemiaHow toTake Care of a Stray Cat Featured ArticlesHow toStop Worrying and Start Living8 Easy Ways to Get Online Without Internet Service How toBe StylishHow toMaintain a Work Life BalanceHow toStudy For ExamsHow toDeal with Dating AnxietyTrending ArticlesWhat Should I Be for Halloween QuizThe Different Types of People You Can Find in a Friend GroupWhich Personality Types Are the Opposite of an Empath?11 Reasons Why Men Pull Away (And What to Do about It)What Book Should I Read QuizThemed Spirit Week Ideas for School and WorkFeatured ArticlesHow toBe Organized in Middle SchoolHow to Fall Asleep Faster & Sleep Better at NightHow toHave a Sense of HumorHow toKnow What You Want in LifeHow toSleep BetterHow toImprove YourselfFeatured ArticlesHow toStart a Business As a TeenagerHow toSave Money as a KidWhat to Do When a Dog AttacksHow toClean Drive C for More SpaceHow toImprove Your LifeHow toGet a Six Pack Without Any EquipmentWatch ArticlesHow toColor SlimeHow toMake GranolaHow toMake Dairy Free Ice CreamHow toClean Old BooksHow toMake Feather EarringsHow toCook CalamariTrending ArticlesHow to Fix a Clogged Catalytic Converter with or without Removing ItVirtual Truth or Dare Questions to Keep Things InterestingWhy Can't I Sleep QuizFrom Alpha to Omega: A Guide to the 7 Male PersonalitiesCan TikTok Auto Scroll? How to Play TikTok Videos AutomaticallyHow to Enable Game Share with Friends on PlayStation 5 CategoriesPets and AnimalsCats wikiHow Newsletter You're all set! Helpful how-tos delivered toyour inbox every week! Sign me up! By signing up you are agreeing to receive emails according to our privacy policy. Home About wikiHow Experts Jobs Contact Us Site Map Terms of Use Privacy Policy Do Not Sell or Share My Info Not Selling Info Contribute Follow Us × Don’t miss out! Sign up for wikiHow’s newsletter Subscribe You're all set! X --632 

Skip to content ASPCA Our WorkHelping People and PetsInvestigations and RescueAnimal Care and RecoveryImproving Laws for AnimalsThe Puppy IndustryProtecting Farm AnimalsAdvancing Horse WelfareASPCA GrantsLocal ServicesNew York CityLos AngelesMiami, FLAsheville, NCOklahoma City, OKHow You Can HelpWays to GiveGet InvolvedFind More Humane FoodAdopt a PetAdvocate for AnimalsReceive Text Updates Primary Nav Menu Our WorkHelping People and Pets Investigations and Rescue Animal Care and Recovery Improving Laws for Animals The Puppy Industry Protecting Farm Animals Advancing Horse Welfare ASPCA Grants Local ServicesNew York City Los Angeles Miami, FL Asheville, NC Oklahoma City, OK How You Can HelpWays to Give Get Involved Find More Humane Food Adopt a Pet Advocate for Animals Receive Text Updates Search form Search About Us Adopt NYC News ASPCA Pro Donate You are herePet Care Cat Care General Cat Care Have you recently added a feline friend to your family? Congratulations! We know you’ll be thrilled to have your new cat in your home. If you are considering adopting a cat, please visit your local shelter. We encourage you to browse our directory of adoptable cats in your area, or use our shelter finder to start your search.Read on for useful tips for new cat parents, and for those looking to brush up on their pet care skills.Basic CareFeedingWe recommend purchasing high-quality, brand-name kitten or cat food. Your veterinarian will be able to assess your new cat or kitten and determine the best diet. Factors such as age, activity level and health make a difference in what and how much a cat should eat.Cats require taurine, an essential amino acid, for heart and eye health. The food you choose should be balanced for the life stage of your cat or kitten. Properly balanced foods will contain taurine.You will need to provide fresh, clean water at all times, and wash and refill your cat’s water bowls daily.Treats should be no more than 5-10% of the diet.Many people feed baby food to a cat or kitten who is refusing food or not feeling well Please read labels carefully: If the baby food contains onion or garlic powder, your pet could be poisoned.Take your pet to your veterinarian if signs of anorexia, diarrhea, vomiting or lethargy continue for more than two days.Please visit our People Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Pets page for a list of off-limits items, as well as our Cat Nutrition Tips page for more information.GroomingMost cats stay relatively clean and rarely need a bath, but you should brush or comb your cat regularly. Frequent brushing helps keep your cat's coat clean, reduces the amount of shedding and cuts down on the incidence of hairballs. Please visit our Cat Grooming Tips page for more information.HandlingTo pick up your cat, place one hand behind the front legs and another under the hindquarters. Lift gently. Never pick up a cat by the scruff of the neck or by the front legs.HousingYour pet should have her own clean, dry place in your home to sleep and rest. Line your cat's bed with a soft, warm blanket or towel. Be sure to wash the bedding often. Please keep your cat indoors. Outdoor cats do not live as long as indoor cats. Outdoor cats are at risk of trauma from cars, or from fights with other cats, raccoons and free-roaming dogs. Coyotes are known to eat cats. Outdoor cats are more likely to become infested with fleas or ticks, as well as contract infectious diseases.IdentificationIf allowed outdoors, your cat must wear a safety collar and an ID tag. A safety collar with an elastic panel will allow your cat to break loose if the collar gets caught on something. And for both indoor and outdoor cats, an ID tag or an implanted microchip can help ensure that your cat is returned if he or she becomes lost.Litter BoxAll indoor cats need a litter box, which should be placed in a quiet, accessible location. In a multi-level home, one box per floor is recommended. Avoid moving the box unless absolutely necessary, but if you must do so, move the box just a few inches per day. Keep in mind that cats won't use a messy, smelly litter box, so scoop solid wastes out of the box at least once a day. Dump everything, wash with a mild detergent and refill at least once a week; you can do this less frequently if using clumping litter. Don't use ammonia, deodorants or scents, especially lemon, when cleaning the litter box. If your cat will not use a litterbox, please consult with your veterinarian. Sometimes refusal to use a litter box is based on a medical condition that required treatment. Please visit our Litter Box Problems page for more information. ScratchingCats need to scratch! When a cat scratches, the old outer nail sheath is pulled off and the sharp, smooth claws underneath are exposed. Cutting your cat’s nails every two to three weeks will keep them relatively blunt and less likely to harm the arms of both humans and furniture. Provide your cat with a sturdy scratching post, at least three feet high. The post should also be stable enough that it won't wobble during use, and should be covered with rough material such as sisal, burlap or tree bark. Many cats also like scratching pads.HealthYour cat should see the veterinarian at least once a year for an examination and annual shots, and immediately if she is sick or injured.Medicines and PoisonsNever give your cat medication that has not been prescribed by a veterinarian. If you suspect that your animal has ingested a poisonous substance, call your veterinarian or the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center for 24-hour animal poison information at (888) 426-4435.Spaying and NeuteringFemale cats should be spayed and male cats neutered by five months of age. Please visit our Spay/Neuter Your Pet page to learn more.VaccinationsYour veterinarian will make recommendations based on your cat's age and health. Please visit our Pet Vaccinations page to learn more.Cat Supply ChecklistPremium-brand cat foodFood dishWater bowlInteractive toysBrushCombSafety cat collar with ID tagScratching post or scratching padLitter box and litterCat carrierCat bed or box with warm blanket or towel Other Ways to Help: Become a Monthly Member Advocate for Animals Join the Advocacy Brigade Volunteer or Foster Share this page: Help the ASPCA Put a Stop to Animal Cruelty Donate Stay Up to Date First Name * Last Name * Email Address * Mobile Number (Optional) By providing my mobile number, I agree to receive 2-4 text messages per month from the ASPCA, which may include requests for charitable donations. Text STOP to opt-out, HELP for more info. Message and data rates may apply. Terms & Conditions / Privacy Policy Leave this field blank ASPCA About Us Careers Contact Press Strategic Cause Partnerships Pet Care Shop © 2023 American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. All rights reserved.The ASPCA is a 501(c)(3) non-for-profit organization. Privacy Policy Legal Info FacebookTwitterYoutubeInstagramTikTok Our Partnerships Subaru ASPCA Pet Health Insurance Underwritten by United States Fire Insurance Company 

FREE SHIPPING on orders over $69DogsCatsShop AllBlogAboutFREE SHIPPING on orders over $69Skip to main contentDogsCatsShop AllBlogAboutTraining • Pet Care • Health • Play • January 27, 2023PetSafe® ExpertRob HunterCats 101: Basic Health & Care Tips to Keep Your Cat Healthy A healthy cat is a happy cat! In observance of National Cat Health Month, we're sharing some tips for keeping your feline family members in good health. Whether your buddy is a playful kitten or a seasoned senior cat, here are 10 ways to keep your cat healthy. 1. Groom your cat regularly You might be thinking, “but don't cats groom themselves?” While cats are known for their cleanliness, some extra help from you can take their health and hygiene to the next level! Short-haired, medium-haired and long-haired cats can all benefit from regular brushing. This helps remove loose hair from the coat, preventing shedding and hairballs. In addition to practical benefits, regular grooming can be a wonderful way to bond with your cat! 2. Provide fresh water 24/7 Just as it is for us, drinking enough water is essential for our cats' health. Proper hydration can keep your cat comfortable and happy by helping to prevent common cat health issues like urinary tract infections and kidney disease. Many cats are picky about the water they drink. If you've ever caught your cat sipping from the sink or pawing at her water bowl, chances are she prefers moving water. This is a common and natural preference among cats! You can give your cat the fresh, flowing water she prefers and encourage her to drink, boosting her hydration, with a pet fountain. 3. Make sure your cat always has a place to potty Should you have more than one litter box? Maybe! A general rule of thumb is to provide one for each cat in your home, plus one more. So, ideally, if you have two cats, you should have three litter boxes. This way, there's always an alternative available in case your cat doesn't feel like using her usual box for some reason. Speaking of which, be mindful of where you place a litter box. Make sure it's somewhere that your cat can always access, and where she'll feel comfortable letting her guard down when nature calls. 4. Keep the litter box clean No one likes a dirty restroom. Many cats will find another place to go (like the carpet... or your pillow) if their litter box hasn't been cleaned in a while. With a traditional litter box, you should try to scoop at least once daily and clean the entire box at least once a week. If you're not a fan of scooping poop (who is?), a self-cleaning litter box is a life-changer, saving you from the stinky chore while giving your cat the consistently clean litter box she deserves. If you do notice your cat is suddenly going outside the litter box, especially when it's clean, check with your vet – this can sometimes be a sign of medical issues. 5. Train your cat to use a scratching post Scratching is a natural, healthy and important behavior for cats. Unfortunately, in our homes this healthy behavior can come at a cost to our décor. Regular scratching on an appropriate surface such as carpet, sisal, or cardboard helps remove the old layers from your cat's claws. Not only will this help prevent damage to your furniture, it will help your cat stretch her muscles and keep her claws in top condition. While it may take some time to introduce your cat to a scratching post or board, it's well worth the effort. Your cat (and your couch) will thank you! 6. Use a cat carrier in the car Does your cat need to visit the vet? Or are you bringing her along on vacation? Always transport your cat in an appropriate carrier designed for pets. Allowing your cat to roam freely in the car can distract you from driving safely, which can lead to accidents that may harm both you and your cat. 7. Maintain a healthy diet and weight Just like humans, dogs, and many other animals, cats can experience health issues if they become overweight. And just like us, the keys to a healthy weight are diet and exercise. To maintain a healthy diet, talk to your vet about which food is best for your cat. If your vet recommends a dry food (kibble) diet, consider an automatic pet feeder to help maintain a consistent routine and portion control. And when it comes to exercise, cat toys are a fun way to keep your cat's mind and body active. By engaging your cat's natural predator instincts, many cat toys make your cat's inner tiger happy while also keeping her slim and trim. 8. Consider spaying or neutering your cat Reproductive diseases can be serious, and affect both male and female cats. Spaying prevents uterine infections and ovarian cancers, and reduces the risk of mammary tumors in female cats, while neutering prevents testicular cancer and some prostate problems in males. Neutering also reduces a male cat's urge to roam, reducing the risk of getting lost or injured away from home. And of course, spaying and neutering helps cats everywhere by reducing the number of homeless cats in shelters. In general, a “fixed” pet is usually a healthier, happier pet, but your vet can help you decide what is best for your cat. 9. Choose a cat-friendly vet Did you know there are some doctors who exclusively see feline patients? It seems to go without saying that cats are not smaller versions of dogs. That said, it follows that cats have different veterinary requirements than dogs do. A veterinarian specializing in feline health and behavior can be a valuable ally in keeping your cat healthy and happy for a lifetime. You can find a feline vet in your area by visiting the American Association of Feline Practitioners. 10. Schedule regular veterinary visits Even if your cat seems healthy, you should visit the vet at least once a year. Annual visits give the vet a chance to catch any potential health issues in their early stages, administer vaccines, and clean your cat's teeth. Your vet can also tell you if your cat is at a healthy weight. And of course, if your cat seems sick or you notice any changes to appetite, litter box use or activity, it's always best to consult your vet. These tips are just the basics. Keeping our feline friends healthy, safe and happy is a full-time job! But we know it's worth every bit of effort to return the love our cats give us every day. For the care you give, your cat will reward you with a lifetime of companionship and joy.Written byRob HunterPetSafe® Brand CopywriterPetSafe® ExpertGet Email UpdatesSubscribe to the latest news, promotions, & more from PetSafe® brand.SubscribeSign up today for the latest news, promotions, and more from PetSafe® brand.Related ProductsDrinkwell® Butterfly Pet Fountain$26.95Out of StockHappy Ride® Collapsible Travel Crate$149.95Out of Stock 

Skip to Main Content Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Menu Find a pet Main menuFind a pet Find a pet Rehome a pet Rehome a pet How to rehome Rehome a horse Rehome a horse How to rehome a horse Foster an animal Foster an animal Horse fostering Advice for adopters Advice for adopters Advice and welfare Main menuAdvice and welfare Advice and welfare Pets Pets Dogs Cats Rabbits Horses Rodents Ferrets Exotic pets Ornamental Fish General Giving up a pet Pet bereavement Find or call a vet Pet theft Brachycephalic animals Lost and found Lab animals Lab animals Phasing out Are animal experiments necessary? Testing chemicals Medicines and vaccines Replacing research animals Reducing research animal suffering Primates and research Biotechnology Farm animals Farm animals Farm animals as pets Slaughter On-farm Live transport Pigs Laying hens Sheep Farmed fish Meat chickens Ducks Dairy cows Beef cattle Turkeys Farmed rabbits Foie Gras Worried about a farm animal? Bovine TB Litter Litter Fishing litter Alternatives to balloons and sky lanterns Single use plastics Sky lanterns Seasonal advice Seasonal advice Spring Summer Autumn Winter Floods Pets at Christmas Diseases Diseases Alabama rot Performing animals Performing animals Guidelines Report concerns FAQs The cost-of-living crisis The cost-of-living crisis Pet cost calculator Food bank Food bank donation point Dog behaviour care costs Wildlife friendly gardening Wildlife friendly gardening The RSPCA wildlife garden Wildlife Wildlife Foxes Squirrels Hedgehogs Otters Seals Bats Rats and mice Rabbits and Hares Find a wildlife rescue centre Wildlife deterrents Injured wild animals Badgers Snakes Deer Wildlife in captivity Wildlife laws Get involved Main menuGet involved Get involved Volunteer Volunteer What can I do? What's it like to volunteer with us? Volunteers' week Big Help Out Campaign Campaign Puppy trade Stun before slaughter Primates as pets Sentient beings Circuses Sanctuaries Farm Animals Better chicken Tougher sentencing Make Wales kinder for animals I'm a Celebrity Stop live exports Animal rehoming Fur Free Britain Gene editing Pets as prizes End the cage age Lab animal regulations Save our breath Join our campaign network Achievements Phase Out Lab Animals Fireworks Slaughterhouses Rabbit breeding End Sky Litter Ear cropping Vapes Better labels better choices End Breed Specific Legislation Act now for animals Donate Donate Leaving a legacy Current appeals Donate in memory Advice for donors Payroll Giving Unwanted items Gift Aid Sponsorship Philanthropy Win Win Raffle Lottery Fundraise Fundraise Virtual challenges At school Animal Hero Running Trekking Cycling Training hub Own place in an event Ideas and resources Fundraising pack Pay in your offline fundraising Swimming My Big Walkies #50MilesForAnimals Young people Young people Subscription Renewal Buttercup Farm 30DaysForAnimals Membership Membership Membership policy statement Events Events Local events One Fun Day Christmas Concert Howloween Great British Spring Clean Businesses Businesses Become a partner Our corporate partners Other ways companies can support What we do Main menuWhat we do What we do Strategy to 2030 Strategy to 2030 Getting justice for animals Ambitions End cruelty End cruelty Investigate cruelty Rescue animals Prevent suffering Prosecution Change the law Work internationally Care for animals Care for animals Rehabilitation Release Our wildlife centres Veterinary care Home for Life Financial assistance Education Education Children in school Young offenders At home Latest Latest News Our blog Publications The Dog Rescuers Jo Brand's Kitten Rescue Media contacts Adoptober RSPCA 2022 essay collection Animal Kindness Index 2022 Wilberforce Lecture Facts, figures and myths Who we are Who we are Governance Our branches Our executives High profile supporters Our history How we work How we work Our mission Policies RSPCA's rules Shop Main menuShop Shop Pet friendly holidays Pet friendly holidays Shop and donate Shop and donate Pet insurance Pet insurance Cat insurance Dog insurance Rabbit insurance Multi-pet insurance Product information FAQs Make a claim My RSPCA Main menu My RSPCA My account My account My pets My pets Sign in Sign in Your local RSPCA Your local RSPCA Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Cat mating facts to protect your cat Cat fact file No two cats are the same, but understanding their biology and behaviour can help you to understand your pet better. Here are our top ten cat facts! Cats have highly developed senses - they can detect higher frequencies of sound than dogs or humans, and have an excellent sense of smell - better than ours! They can see better than us in dark and dim light. Cats are expert hunters and hunt alone. In the wild, they'll spend 6-8 hours a day hunting. They can hear the high-pitched frequencies used by small rodents and their whiskers (or 'vibrissae') are highly sensitive to vibrations, helping them to detect prey. Cats are agile - they have powerful, tightly controlled muscles and fast reflexes that allow them to move quickly and gracefully. They are skilled at running, jumping, climbing and stealthily stalking prey. Cats have a range of ways to communicate - including purrs, 'meows', trills, chirrups, growls, yowls, and hisses. They also communicate visually using different body postures, as well as visual markers such as scratch marks or the deposition of faeces. Cats are independent - survival is a solitary affair for cats, and they're self-reliant for food, shelter, grooming and territory defence. They can be social, but prefer to choose their own companions. Cats are territorial - a cat's territory is an area it defends, aggressively if required, against other cats. They use a range of methods to mark their territory, including scratching, spraying urine and depositing faeces. Help keep your cat safe outside. Cats are meat eaters - meat is an important part of a cat's diet, and they can't survive without the nutrients found in animal-based food. Cats love cat naps - domestic cats sleep for 12-18 hours a day! Sleep allows them to restore their energy resources, so it's vital for a predator that needs to be ready to hunt whenever it detects prey. Cats are playful - they're intelligent and need both mental and physical stimulation. Play is important, as it improves motor skills, provides brain training and encourages social behaviour. Keep your cats entertained with fun toys. Cats are clean animals - tiny abrasive hooks, found on the centre of cats' tongues, helps them to groom themselves. Grooming keeps a cat's coat in good condition and also helps to remove fleas and other parasites. Read more about keeping cats healthy. Cat care tips and advice If you're thinking of getting a cat, remember that they'll need space to be active and have regular interaction with people and other animals (cats don't really like to be left alone for long periods during the day). They will also need access to clean water, meat-based cat food and regular grooming, as well as private access to a litter tray, which should ideally be replaced once a week. We have lots of advice for cat owners, including tips on understanding cat behaviour, when and why to neuter and specific advice on how to look after a kitten during those first few weeks and months. Take a look around to learn more... Pet cost calculator Compare cat and dog breeds to help you decide which pet is right for you and your budget. Use our calculator Adopt a cat or kitten from us We have lots of cats and kittens in need of a loving new home, so why not adopt a kitten or cat from us? And if you've ever wondered what it's like to be a cat in a rehoming pod, here's your chance to experience a 360-degree view with some inquisitive kittens! Don't forget to move the camera around for the full experience! Share this... How to keep your cat healthy and happy Find out more about the health and welfare needs of cats. Stray and feral cats Advice on what to do if you've found a stray or feral cat or kitten that needs help, whether they are pregnant, injured or lost. What should cats eat? Find out more about the dietary needs of cats. Pet insurance for cats Discover more about insuring your cat with our pet insurance. Understanding cat behaviour Find out more about the behavioural needs of cats. Thinking of buying a kitten? Thinking of buying a kitten? Why not consider adoption? Dogs Cats Environment Keeping cats indoors Keeping cats out of gardens Cat Litter Diet Behaviour Understanding cat behaviour Company Health and welfare Neutering Poisoning Common cat illnesses Grooming Vaccinations FIV Kittens How to look after a kitten Rabbits Horses Rodents Ferrets Exotic pets Ornamental Fish General Giving up a pet Pet bereavement Find or call a vet Pet theft Brachycephalic animals Lost and found Can you offer a loving home to a cat in our care? I've been reserved CALYPSO GOMEZ CASEY HENRY NUTMEG SALTY CLOVE SIMBA MOSES DOMINO Hidden How we help In 2022 we investigated and closed 63,563 complaints of animal cruelty Get in touch Find your local RSPCA Contact us Report cruelty Our charity Media centre Science RSPCA Assured Education Follow us Or sign up for email updates © RSPCA 2023. All rights reserved. The RSPCA helps animals in England and Wales. Registered charity no.219099. Terms and conditions Site map National privacy notice Accessibility Modern slavery Contact us Jobs 

Skip to Main ContentOffersWhere To BuyCareersOpen in new windowNewsOpen in new windowContact UsDogsDogsDog FoodDry Dog FoodWet Dog FoodPuppy FoodSenior Dog FoodGrain Free Dog FoodPet Food FinderSee All Dog FoodDog TreatsDog BonesDog ChewsDog Dental ChewsDog Jerky & StripsRawhides & RollhidesDog SupplementsSee All Dog TreatsDog InformationDog ArticlesDog BreedsDog BrandsYour Pet. Our Passion. One App. Get more of what you love. Explore NowCatsCatsCat FoodDry Cat FoodWet Cat FoodKitten FoodSenior Cat FoodPet Food FinderSee All Cat FoodCat TreatsDry Cat TreatsWet Cat TreatsDental Cat TreatsCat Toppers & ComplementsCat SupplementsSee All Cat TreatsCat LitterClumping LitterLightweight LitterNon-Clumping LitterUnscented LitterAlternative LitterLitter Box SystemsLitter Box MonitorSee All Cat LitterCat InformationCat ArticlesCat BreedsCat BrandsYour Pet. Our Passion. One App. Get more of what you love. Explore NowWhy PurinaWhy PurinaNutritionOur IngredientsQuality Pet FoodNutrition PhilosophyResponsible SourcingTrace Your Pets FoodNo Artificial Flavors or PreservativesInnovationProduct InnovationCat Allergen ReductionHealthy Gut MicrobiomePassionShelterDog ShowsPurina InstituteOpen in new windowPurina FarmsPurple Leash ProjectOur StoriesPets At WorkAnimal WelfarePhilosophySustainabilityRecyclingPet Care PartnersPartners & Corporate GivingFAQsAbout PurinaYour Pet. Our Passion. One App. Get more of what you love. Explore NowmyPurina RewardsmyPurina RewardsREWARDSLearn About myPurina RewardsDownload AppOpen in new windowYour Pet. Our Passion. One App. Get more of what you love. Explore NowRebatesWhere to BuyCareersOpen in new windowNewsOpen in new windowContact UsProductsArticlesPagesBreedsCancelHomeDog & Cat Articles with Advice from Our ExpertsCat ArticlesCat Care TipsRead articles about:Cat CareBasics of Caring for a CatPublished: 7/17/2017Share this articleBringing home a new kitten or adult cat means you’ll need to learn some cat care basics. Everything from food and litter to veterinary care and grooming are essential. Being equipped with a basic amount of knowledge and having the right supplies can get you and your new cat started on a long and loving relationship together. Select a Veterinarian The first step in bringing a cat home is finding a local veterinarian you can trust and communicate with openly. Once you’ve decided, you can reach out to your cat’s veterinarian and set up vaccine appointments, ask vital questions and get essential tips about how to keep your cat happy and healthy. A good veterinarian isn’t just there to give your cat their annual checkups. Veterinarians are a wealth of information any time you’re concerned about your cat’s health, behavior or anything else. Feeding & Fresh Water Learning how to feed a cat starts with selecting the proper nutrition. Since kittens and adult cats have different nutritional needs, it’s essential to start your cat on an age-appropriate kitten food or adult cat food to make sure they’re getting the right nutrients their body needs to thrive. The amount of food you should feed your cat is usually located on the cat food label itself and is relative to their size and age. Develop a feeding routine so your cat knows when to expect they’ll eat. If you plan to feed dry cat food, you can put an entire day’s serving in their food dish every morning and let them graze throughout the day. If you give them wet food, it should be consumed within 20 or 30 minutes of serving and any remaining food should be refrigerated and eaten within 24 hours of serving. Provide Fresh Water Always keep a supply of clean, fresh water for your cat to help them stay hydrated. Wild cats avoid stagnant water that may be home to harmful bacteria or parasites. As a result, many domesticated cats may instinctively avoid drinking water that hasn’t been replaced, so make sure to replace the water in their bowl daily. Choose a shallow, wide bowl that won’t irritate their whiskers. You can also try a recirculating water fountain. Familiarize Your Cat With the Litter Box As a cat owner, a litter box and plenty of fresh litter should be a priority, as should proper litter box training. Since adult cats often instinctually look for a sandy surface when they need to eliminate, litter box training might not be necessary. Kittens usually need some training. As early as four weeks, kittens can start to learn how to use the litter box. Find one that is appropriate to the size of your cat. For example, a kitten might find a large litter box scary and try to avoid it. Therefore, find one that’s a bit smaller. Introduce your kitten to the litter box or boxes you have in your house and let them explore. Then, put your kitten in the litter box. On many occasions, kittens will instinctively know to eliminate in this location. If they don’t, however, don’t worry. Continue to place them in the litter box after naps, after meals or drinks of water. Eventually, they’ll get the hang of it and start to use the litter box independently. The general rule of thumb is to have one litter box per cat, plus one. So if you have two cats, you need three total litter boxes. You also want to keep the litter box separate from their food and water bowls. Groom Your Cat Although cats are excellent at grooming themselves, grooming your cat will be necessary from time to time, especially for longhaired breeds. Whether it’s nail trimming, bathing or brushing, make sure you have the right tools on hand to get the job done. For shorter-haired cats, you may need to brush your cat only once or twice a month; with longer-haired breeds, it may be a daily requirement. Nonetheless, when your cat is shedding, it’s advisable to brush them with increased frequency to prevent the floors and furniture from being covered in hair. Bathing your cat can occur less often. Cats are adept at keeping themselves clean; however, if your cat’s fur has accumulated stubborn dirt or your cat has mobility issues preventing them from grooming themselves, it may be necessary. Also, hairless breeds need to be bathed weekly to remove body oils usually absorbed by cat hair. Make sure you have cat shampoo on hand and plenty of treats to reward their cooperation. Talk with your veterinarian to get specific recommendations for your cat. Cat Playtime As an experienced cat owner can tell you, cats need to be mentally stimulated. Fortunately, there are plenty of games you can play with your cat that can give them physical and mental exercise at the same time while helping the two of you bond. Whether it’s having them chase a toy on a string that you drag across the floor, giving them a catnip toy or introducing them to cat enrichment games, some of the best times you and your cat will have together will be during playtime. Cat Supplies Finally, make a new kitten supply checklist to ensure you have all the things you need. A collar with an ID tag (even if they’re indoor only), bedding, a scratching post and cat carrier will be must-haves for you and your new cat or kitten as you start your new life together. You should also get your cat microchipped, just in case! Cat Care 101: Cat Care Do’s & Don’ts There are a lot of things to keep in mind when owning a cat. Here’s a handy list of things to practice and avoid when owning a cat. Do Play with your cat every day. Your cat needs mental enrichment, and daily play will do wonders for their health and quality of life. Controlled access to the outdoors through a “catio” (enclosed or screened-in patio or similar area) or teaching them to walk with a harness can be beneficial as well. Provide a scratching post or pad for your cat. Scratching posts allow cats to exercise, stretch out their bodies to full length, clean away dead scales from their claws and mark their territory. Without a scratching post, your cat might choose your furniture as the place to express this natural behavior. Keep litter boxes clean and inviting and in a quiet area. Remove soiled litter at least once a day. For multiple cats, more boxes are necessary. We recommend one box for each cat, plus one more. Boxes should be placed in different areas of the house, if possible. Don’t Pick up your adult cat by the scruff of their neck. While mother cats often pick up their kittens this way, an adult cat is too heavy for this treatment, and it could result in pain or injury. Instead, pick up your cat with both hands—one under the chest behind the front legs and one under the abdomen, supporting her rump. Let your cat chew on string, especially if you’re not watching. If they swallow it, it could create an intestinal blockage that might make them sick. Give your cat access to windows that don’t have screens. They could jump out after a bird or something else exciting and seriously injure themselves in a fall. Perhaps this seems like a lot to keep in mind, but don’t worry—caring for a cat becomes second nature in no time. Once you and your new cat have developed a routine, you should have no problem ensuring your cat lives a long, healthy and happy life. Learn more about kitten and cat ownership with tips from our experts on our Pet Expertise page. Related articlesHow to Keep Cats’ Teeth CleanDid you know 8 out of 10 cats over the age of 3 have tooth and gum problems? Read from our expert cat care team on how to avoid dental disease in your cat. Holiday Plants Poisonous to CatsTraveling With Cats: Great Cat-Friendly Travel Tips for SummerEarn myPurina Rewards with Every PurchaseUse your points for treats, toys, and gift cards with myPurina app. Get Started with myPurina AppOpen in new windowContact UsInternational SitesSitemapNavigate to our Facebook pageNavigate to our Twitter pageNavigate to our YouTube pageNavigate to our Instagram pageTerms & ConditionsNotice at CollectionPrivacy Policy (Updated)Do Not Sell Or Share My Personal InformationAccessibilityTerms of SaleLinking PolicyCopyright Infringement NotificationUser Generated ContentAbout Our AdsSupply Chains Act 

More results... Generic selectors Exact matches only Search in title Search in content Post Type Selectors Search in posts Search in pages Search in posts Search in pages Search in posts Search in pages Filter by Categories Adoptions Alexandria Petbarn Animal Care & Information Animal Care Services Animal Cruelty & Welfare Bathurst Petbarn Blog Branches Branches and Support Teams Bushfire Response Campaign & Promotions Care for Animals Careers at RSPCA NSW Community Community Programs Corporate Sponsorship Corporate Support Our Place Corporate Support Your Place COVID Related Updates Disaster and Alerts Education Emergency Appeals Events Events & Corporate Events at RSPCA Exclude Search Fundraiser for RSPCA Gift Donation Hunter shelter and vet hospital Intensive Breeding Taskforce Latest Appeals Leave a gift in your will Locations Lost and Found Media Media Releases News & Inspectorate Online Store 2 Owning a pet Pet Hazard Petbarn Primary and Secondary Rescue and Rehabilitate Retail Seasonal Messages Shelters Support Groups Sydney Shelter and Veterinary Hospital Training Uncategorized Veterinary Hospitals Veterinary Services Volunteer at home Volunteer at our place Volunteer at RSPCA Volunteer FROM home Working in Communities 1300 CRUELTY Adopt More results... Generic selectors Exact matches only Search in title Search in content Post Type Selectors Search in posts Search in pages Search in posts Search in pages Search in posts Search in pages Filter by Categories Adoptions Alexandria Petbarn Animal Care & Information Animal Care Services Animal Cruelty & Welfare Bathurst Petbarn Blog Branches Branches and Support Teams Bushfire Response Campaign & Promotions Care for Animals Careers at RSPCA NSW Community Community Programs Corporate Sponsorship Corporate Support Our Place Corporate Support Your Place COVID Related Updates Disaster and Alerts Education Emergency Appeals Events Events & Corporate Events at RSPCA Exclude Search Fundraiser for RSPCA Gift Donation Hunter shelter and vet hospital Intensive Breeding Taskforce Latest Appeals Leave a gift in your will Locations Lost and Found Media Media Releases News & Inspectorate Online Store 2 Owning a pet Pet Hazard Petbarn Primary and Secondary Rescue and Rehabilitate Retail Seasonal Messages Shelters Support Groups Sydney Shelter and Veterinary Hospital Training Uncategorized Veterinary Hospitals Veterinary Services Volunteer at home Volunteer at our place Volunteer at RSPCA Volunteer FROM home Working in Communities Who we are Who we areExplore RSPCA NSW’s facilities, see our annual report and policies, and view our job vacancies. About RSPCA NSW Locations Shelters Sydney (Yagoona) Hunter Shelter Illawarra Region (Unanderra) Coffs Harbour Broken Hill Blue Mountains (Katoomba) Orange Port Macquarie Veterinary Hospitals Sydney Hunter Region (Rutherford) Broken Hill Care Centres Care Centre Tuggerah Petbarn Retail Branches and Supporter Groups Annual Report The Board Careers at RSPCA NSW Inspectorate Community RSPCA Policies Legislation Knowledge Base Strategic Plan Donate NowMake a difference in an animal's life today! What we do What we doDiscover RSPCA NSW adoptions, community programs, education, training and veterinary services, plus learn about animal care, safety and welfare. Adoptions Dogs and Puppies Cat and Kittens Pocket Pets Birds Livestock Exceptional Owners Veterinary Services RSPCA Sydney Veterinary Hospital Rescue and Rehabilitate Animal Ambulance Drives For Lives Behaviour Pet Rehabilitation Program Lost and Found I’ve lost my pet Found a Pet Care for Animals Owning a Pet Adopting a New Pet Veterinary Care Costs Locating a Lost Pet Pets and Rental Properties Disaster Management Plans Enrichment The Chain Exchange Dog Care Dog Walking Guidelines Parvovirus in Dogs Barking Dog Training Tips and Videos Bathing and Grooming Identification Veterinary Care Nutrition Housing Breeds Enrichment Cat Care Kitten Care Keeping Wildlife Safe and Your Cat Happy Training Bathing and Grooming Identification Veterinary Care Nutrition Housing Breeds Pocket Pets Livestock Birds Housing Identification Veterinary Care Nutrition Bathing and Grooming Training Pet Hazards Toxic Plants for Pets Christmas Season Fireworks and Storms Heat Stress Snake Bites and Pets Book Your Event with Us Education Primary OOSH Early Stage 1 (Kindergarten) Stage 1 Secondary Stage 4 Tertiary School Holiday Program Community Groups Animal Ambassadors Family Fun Training ACM20121 Certificate II in Animal Care ACMMIC401 Implant Microchip in Cats and Dogs Basic Animal First Aid Social Return on Investment Animal Welfare Our Inspectorate Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act (1979) Working in Communities Community Aged Care Program Community Domestic Violence program Community Homelessness Program Volunteering for Community Programs Outreach Animal Assistance Programs Indigenous Community Companion Animal Health Program (ICCAHP) Youth and Community programs Pathways Youth Initiatives Community Branches and Programs RSPCA Pet Insurance Home Ever After Surrender Disaster and Alerts Hot weather Fireworks and Storms Bushfires and House Fires Droughts Bushfire Response What We’re Doing Get Bushfire Assistance Bushfire Appeal Where We’re Going Donate NowMake a difference in an animal's life today! How you can help How you can helpMake a lifesaving difference to animals by becoming a foster carer, donating, fundraising, joining an event, volunteering and more. Ways to Give Fundraise for RSPCA Buy Raffle Tickets Leave a Gift in your Will Events at RSPCA Become an RSPCA Member Membership Sign Up Renew My Membership Volunteer at RSPCA NSW Foster Care Book Your Event with Us Corporate Support Cupcake Day Corporate Visits Workplace Giving Corporate Matched Giving Million Paws Walk Corporate Support Days Retail Op Shops Online Shop Donate NowMake a difference in an animal's life today! Our stories Our storiesGet the latest news and stories from RSPCA NSW, including appeals and media releases, plus find us on social media. Blog Social Media Film and TV Notification Form Donate NowMake a difference in an animal's life today! Contact ContactNeed to report a cruelty case, make an enquiry, or speak to us about anything else? Please get in touch. Contact us Report Animal Cruelty Animal Identification Breach Donate NowMake a difference in an animal's life today! Call RSPCA NSW Make a difference in an animals life today! Donate Now Animal Care & Information Home Blog Animal Care & InformationHow to: Care for Your Pet Cat or Kitten How to: Care for Your Pet Cat or Kitten Posted on November 7, 2021 There’s nothing cuter than watching a cat chase a patch of light, using their paws to knead as if they’re baking bread, or climbing into everything and anything. That’s why the internet is practically made of cats, with millions of videos to show us just how adorable and funny these felines can be. But if you’re planning on adopting a cat or kitten, what’s the best way of caring for your fluffy friend? Cats make for purrfect pets. They’re affectionate and clean, love to play and provide great companionship. In fact, they’ll love nothing more than curling up in your lap. Compared to dogs, cats don’t need lots of space for exercise. They’re also very independent, so will cope well at entertaining themselves. Follow our seven-step guide to ensure your feline family member stays happy and healthy. 1. Food Cats are carnivores, meaning they must eat animal protein to survive. Give your pet a high quality cat food suited to her life stage and health status. The first ingredient should always be meat. Avoid canned products with fillers such as corn and rice. RSPCA NSW recommends using dry food as the base of your cat’s diet. Canned food has been shown to increase the risk of dental disease in some circumstances, so may be better used as a treat, to entice fussy eaters, or for specific medical conditions. Cats also need some natural foods, such as fresh, raw meat; raw chicken wings; and raw, meaty bones. While many cats go crazy over fish, feeding them it exclusively doesn’t provide them with the correct fatty acids. Despite what many people think, cats can’t drink cow’s milk. It’s also important that your cat does not consume alcohol, avocado, chocolate, coffee, cooked bones, manufactured meat such as sausages, garlic, grapes, nuts or onions. Always ensure your cat has access to clean, fresh water. 2. Desexing It is very important that your cat, male or female, is desexed. This helps prevent unwanted litters and also has health benefits for cats, such as reducing the risk of developing cancer. For more information about desexing, click here. 3. Veterinary Care Cats need yearly visits to the veterinarian for vaccinations, boosters and general health checks. This includes vaccinations against cat flu. They also require regular flea control and worming, even if they are indoor-only cats. Cats also need help cleaning their teeth – look for treats which do this. Any changes in defecation, drinking, eating, urination, or weight loss or gain should be checked out with your veterinarian. For more information about cat flu, click here. 4. Grooming Many cats love being brushed and if you start when he’s young, he should become used to it. Grooming is especially important if your cat has long fur, as it will prevent fur balls and his hair from becoming matted. Regular grooming also provides bonding time and of course, will stop your house from becoming covered in fur! Flat-faced cats may also need some help cleaning their faces. 5. Litter trays Cats need access to a clean litter tray at all times. They should instinctively use this from a young age. Keep their litter tray in a quiet place away from their food and water. If you have more than one cat, they will need at least one litter tray each. Some cats prefer certain types of litter trays or brands of cat litter over others. Others may need their litter tray cleaning several times a day. If they’re not happy, or if they’re anxious or stressed, they might decide to urinate elsewhere. For more information about problematic litter tray use, click here. 6. Identification In New South Wales, you must have your cat microchipped and registered by law. Check with your local council for details. Make sure you keep the details on your cat’s microchip up to date. It is also a good idea to have a tag on your cat’s collar with your contact details, especially if she goes outdoors. For more information about microchipping, click here. 7. Why keep a cat indoors? RSPCA NSW advocates keeping cats inside. This keeps them safe from outside dangers, such as disease, injury, other cats, people and traffic. If your cat does go outdoors, we strongly recommends keeping him inside between dusk and dawn. Make sure your indoors cat is kept happy by ensuring he can always get his paws on: a scratching post to keep his claws sharp and your furniture safe a clean litter tray cardboard boxes with holes cut into them cat-safe plants, such as cat grass lots of sunny spots to lie in. Just make sure he always has access to shade too! plenty of toys, especially ones which allow him to use his chasing and pouncing instincts Related articles Adopt a cat or kitten More information about cat care Why are lilies toxic to cats? More results... Generic selectors Exact matches only Search in title Search in content Post Type Selectors Search in posts Search in pages Search in posts Search in pages Search in posts Search in pages Filter by Categories Adoptions Alexandria Petbarn Animal Care & Information Animal Care Services Animal Cruelty & Welfare Bathurst Petbarn Blog Branches Branches and Support Teams Bushfire Response Campaign & Promotions Care for Animals Careers at RSPCA NSW Community Community Programs Corporate Sponsorship Corporate Support Our Place Corporate Support Your Place COVID Related Updates Disaster and Alerts Education Emergency Appeals Events Events & Corporate Events at RSPCA Exclude Search Fundraiser for RSPCA Gift Donation Hunter shelter and vet hospital Intensive Breeding Taskforce Latest Appeals Leave a gift in your will Locations Lost and Found Media Media Releases News & Inspectorate Online Store 2 Owning a pet Pet Hazard Petbarn Primary and Secondary Rescue and Rehabilitate Retail Seasonal Messages Shelters Support Groups Sydney Shelter and Veterinary Hospital Training Uncategorized Veterinary Hospitals Veterinary Services Volunteer at home Volunteer at our place Volunteer at RSPCA Volunteer FROM home Working in Communities CategoriesAnimal Care & Information Campaign & Promotions Community Programs Events & Corporate News & Inspectorate Seasonal Messages Archives October 2023 September 2023 August 2023 July 2023 June 2023 May 2023 April 2023 March 2023 February 2023 December 2022 November 2022 October 2022 September 2022 August 2022 July 2022 June 2022 May 2022 April 2022 March 2022 February 2022 January 2022 December 2021 November 2021 October 2021 September 2021 August 2021 July 2021 June 2021 April 2021 March 2021 February 2021 January 2021 December 2020 November 2020 October 2020 September 2020 August 2020 June 2020 May 2020 April 2020 March 2020 February 2020 January 2020 December 2019 November 2019 October 2019 September 2019 August 2019 July 2019 June 2019 May 2019 April 2019 March 2019 February 2019 January 2019 December 2018 November 2018 October 2018 September 2018 July 2018 May 2018 April 2018 March 2018 February 2018 January 2018 December 2017 October 2017 September 2017 August 2017 July 2017 June 2017 May 2017 April 2017 March 2017 February 2017 January 2017 December 2016 October 2016 September 2016 August 2016 June 2016 May 2016 April 2016 March 2016 January 2016 December 2015 June 2015 April 2015 InformationTerms & Conditions Privacy Policy Contact us Sitemap Connect with Us Our Promise to You We promise to uphold the highest ethical standards. Your personal information has never been, and will never be, sold or traded to other charities. This is our promise to you. We feed and recommend Royal Canin eNewsletter Sign up to our monthly newsletter and see our inspiring animal stories. Subscribe We acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the land where we work and live. We pay our respects to Elders past and present. We celebrate the stories, culture and traditions of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Elders of all communities who continue to work and live on this land. Proudly supported and hosted by Digital Pacific|Site by Marlin - A Strategy, Creative and Digital Agency|Chat provider: LiveChat Copyright © 2023 RSPCA NSW | ABN 87 000 001 641 | RON: R251000223 ??? ? 

Skip to content Pet blog Shop Open main menu Cats Cat Breeds Complete index of all the wonderful cat breeds and mixes Cat Nutrition Deciding what you can and cannot feed your furry friend is a crucial decision Cat Gear We love our cats, and therefore we want to get them the best gear Cat Behaviour Understanding cat behavior can set you both up for a happy, productive relationship Dogs Dog Breeds Complete index of all the wonderful dog breeds and mixes Dog Nutrition Deciding what you can and cannot feed your four legged friend is a crucial decision Dog Gear We love our dogs, and therefore we want to get them the best gear Dog Training Training your dog can set you both up for a happy, productive relationship Search Food Recalls Dog food recalls The most complete list of dog food recalls Cat food recalls The most complete list of cat food recalls Ask a Vet Close panel Cats Cat Breeds Complete index of all the wonderful cat breeds and mixes Cat Nutrition Deciding what you can and cannot feed your furry friend is a crucial decision Cat Gear We love our cats, and therefore we want to get them the best gear Cat Behaviour Understanding cat behavior can set you both up for a happy, productive relationship Dogs Dog Breeds Complete index of all the wonderful dog breeds and mixes Dog Nutrition Deciding what you can and cannot feed your four legged friend is a crucial decision Dog Gear We love our dogs, and therefore we want to get them the best gear Dog Training Training your dog can set you both up for a happy, productive relationship Hepper is reader-supported. When you buy via links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission at no cost to you. Learn more. Cat Care: 10 Expert Tips on Health, Nutrition & More By Nicole Cosgrove Updated on Aug 29, 2023 Share Giving your cat a nutritious and balanced diet is vital for her overall health. Proper care can prolong your cat’s life and ensure your feline friend is always happy. You need to consider numerous things when caring for your cat. Here are some basic cat care tips for all cat owners. The 10 Expert Tips on Cat Care 1. Brush Your Cat Daily Cats are very clean creatures, and they spend most of their time grooming themselves. Ensure you brush your cat every day to decrease the hairballs that can form in the alimentary canal. Combing is essential as it removes loose hair and dirt from her coat and allows you to notice any change in her body. In addition, brushing helps your cat to relax, and they enjoy it. If you want your cat to be cooperative, ensure you connect the combing with a happy occasion. For instance, if you brush your cat before serving it some food, it will relate combing with something yummy. Cats don’t necessarily have to be bathed, but there are some instances that you have to bathe them. For example, you can wash your cat if she is sprinkled with unpleasant liquid or has fleas. Image Credit: ANURAK PONGPATIMET, Shutterstock 2. Clean Your Cat’s Teeth Brushing your cat’s teeth can help prevent dental problems like tooth decay and gum disease. Oral health problems like a plague, gingivitis, and bad teeth can cause bacterial infection in the mouth, leading to feline diseases. Brushing her teeth occasionally will help prevent all these health problems. You can ask for your veterinarian’s assistance if you cannot brush your cat’s teeth yourself. 3. Never Feed Your Cat Too Much Dry Food Cats are carnivores by nature and mainly feed on animal products like meat. Giving your cat dry food is not good because they contain large amounts of carbohydrates, which is not ideal for cats. Some common health issues that are associated with dry food include diabetes, hairballs, obesity, dental disease, kidney disease, cystitis, asthma, hepatic lipidosis, and inflammatory bowel disease. To prevent such medical problems, give your cat food that is rich in protein, minimal carbohydrates, and moderate amounts of fats. Also, ensure your cat gets considerate amounts of minerals, vitamins, amino acids, and fatty acids for a healthy life. Besides, ensure your cat has better access to fresh and clean water at any given time. You will notice that your cat will drink more water after feeding on dry food since they have low water concentration compared to canned food. Nursing and elderly cats dehydrate faster than other cats; hence they need more water. Image Credit: Skrypnykov Dmytro, Shutterstock 4. Better Housing Cats love napping during the day. Ensure your cat has a clean and dry place for resting and sleeping. Line her bed with a soft, warm towel or blanket. Make sure you wash the bedding regularly. You may want to keep your cat indoors to avoid being eaten by Coyotes. Outdoor cats are prone to risks such as being hit by cars or fighting with other cats. Besides, outdoor cats get infested with ticks and fleas, contracting infectious diseases. 5. Provide Enough Litter Boxes The general thumb rule is to have one litter box for every cat plus an extra one. This means that if you have three cats, you need to have at least four litter boxes. One litter box per floor is ideal for multi-level homes and put every box in an easy-to-access area. Please don’t place the litter box at dark corners of your house since your cats will not be comfortable using them in such areas. In addition, ensure that the litter box is not covered because your cat will not be willing to use it. Ensure that the boxes are clean since cats don’t like using messy litter boxes, hence the need for regular scooping at least once a day. You also need to dump and refill everything every week. Wash the litter boxes with mild detergent and not with deodorants or ammonia. Your cat can start urinating outside the litter box if the box is dirty or she has other medical issues. Image Credit: xamnesiacx84, Shutterstock 6. Trim Your Cat’s Claws It would help if you trimmed your cat’s claws at least twice a month. This helps to prevent the nails from becoming too sharp, long, frayed, or broken. Long claws can tear your furniture or clothing. They can also make your feline ally scratch you accidentally when holding her. 7. Purchase a Scratching Post for Your Cat Cats enjoy scratching. If you don’t want claw marks on your valuable furniture, buy a scratcher or scratching post for your cat. Then train or show your cat how to use the scratcher. Place the scratcher three feet high in the middle of the room where main activities take place. Your cat may ignore it if you position it at the far-end corner. Scratching can help your cat pull off the older outer nail sheath, leaving sharp, smooth claws that may not destroy furniture or harm someone. If your feline friend follows your instructions well during training, you can reward her with treats since they love them. This may encourage her to do better next time. Check Latest Price A cat scratcher can provide hours of fun daily for any cat, especially our Hepper Hi-Lo Cat Scratcher. It's a cardboard scratcher built to last and amuse (all while looking stylish in any room). It can be adjusted to three different positions – high, low, and lower – and is guaranteed to keep your feline companion engaged and entertained, away from getting into [too much] mischief or scratching things they shouldn't. You can click here to learn more about this piece of modern cat furniture and kitty play haven. 8. Neuter or Spay Your Cat Neutering or spaying your cat is very beneficial, and it’s a safe way to control your pets’ population. Taking care of dozens of kittens is stressful, and not many cat owners are willing to do this. When female cats go into heat, they are very stubborn. Spaying helps prevent female cats from reproductive diseases such as ovarian cancers, uterine infections, and breast tumors. On the other hand, neutering prevents prostate problems and testicular cancer in male cats. 9. Select a Cat-Friendly Veterinarian If you don’t have a vet for your cats, you can ask other cat owners to suggest a cat-friendly veterinarian in your location. Find a vet who specializes in feline health and anatomy for the best health of your cat. Look for a veterinarian who resides near your home for a timely arrival in case of an emergency. The vet will advise you on various cat needs, vaccinations, and check-ups for your cat’s overall health. Image Credit: didesign021, Shutterstock 10. Allow Your Cats to Play Cats are very active and playful. They require physical and mental stimulation. Ensure you provide your cats with a wide range of toys to play with. It is good to note that cats are different, and each cat has its preferences and tastes. You will find that one of your cats loves playing with a mice toy while a plastic spring toy amuses another. Therefore, make sure you provide plenty of toys for your cat to select for herself. You can also encourage and train your children to play and treat your cats. Many kids don’t know how to treat pets. Final Thoughts Cats are lovely and intelligent creatures. Pet owners need to take good care of their cats for a healthy life. Cleanliness is the fundamental thing to do, ranging from cleaning your cat’s teeth, beddings, dishes, and litter boxes. Cats usually hide their illness signs, so ensure you keep an eye on them to monitor any change in their drinking, eating, activity level, or litter box habits. You can consult your veterinarian if you notice any undesirable cat behavior. Related Read: 8 Cat Care Tips to Help During Lockdowns Featured Image Credit: cynoclub, Shutterstock ContentsThe 10 Expert Tips on Cat Care1. Brush Your Cat Daily2. Clean Your Cat’s Teeth3. Never Feed Your Cat Too Much Dry Food4. Better Housing5. Provide Enough Litter Boxes6. Trim Your Cat’s Claws7. Purchase a Scratching Post for Your Cat8. Neuter or Spay Your Cat9. Select a Cat-Friendly Veterinarian10. Allow Your Cats to PlayFinal Thoughts Authored by Nicole Cosgrove Nicole is a lover of animals of all sizes but is especially fascinated with the feline variety. She’s the proud mom of Baby, a Burmese, and works every day so he can relax in the sunshine or by the fire. She’s always had a cat in her home and has spent countless days with others, observing behaviors and softening up even the grouchiest of the lot. Nicole wants to share her kitty expertise with you so you and your cat can live happy, healthy, and care-free....Read more Advertisement Trending Posts Can Cats Eat Garlic? Vet-Reviewed Facts & Safety Tips 4 Homemade Grain-Free Cat Treat Recipes (Vet Approved) How to Get Cat Poop Stains Out of the Couch: 4 Stain Remover Options 18 Cats That Don’t Shed (Non-Shedding Breeds): Pictures, Info & FAQ Related Articles Further Reading How to Tell Your Cat You Love Them: 10 Simple Ways (with Pictures) By Nicole Aug 11, 2023 - 8 min read Why Is Your Female Cat Spraying All of a Sudden? 4 Vet-Approved Reasons By Gregory Aug 28, 2023 - 7 min read How Many Cats Can You Own in Virginia? 2023 Update By Nicole Aug 9, 2023 - 4 min read Vet Articles Latest Vet Answers The latest veterinarians' answers to questions from our database Why Does My Cat Hide? 3 Likely Reasons Answered by Dr. Lindsay Bisset, BVSc (Vet) Beagle Pain Syndrome: Causes, Signs & Care Guide Answered by Dr. Rachel Ellison 8 Common Diseases of Goldfish: Vet Approved Treatment & Prevention Answered by Dr. Luqman Javed, DVM (Vet) How to Check a Dog’s Heart Rate: Our Vet’s Tips, Tricks, & Guide Answered by Dr. Luqman Javed, DVM (Vet) Can a Dog Take Metronidazole Without Food? Answered by Dr. Kim Podlecki, DVM (Vet) 7 Neurological Issues in Dogs & Common Signs to Keep in Mind Answered by Dr. Chantal Villeneuve, MS BVetMed (Vet) Cat food recalls Have a cat? Stay on top of cat food recalls here > Dog food recalls Have a dog? Stay on top of dog food recalls here > Ask a vet Have a question? talk to a vet online for advice > #HepperOfficial Hepper.com does not intend to provide veterinary advice. While we provide information resources and canine education, the content here is not a substitute for veterinary guidance. Update Privacy Preferences Search Dogs Dog Food Recalls Dog Breeds Dog Nutrition Dog Gear Dog Training Cats Cat Food Recalls Cat Breeds Cat Nutrition Cat Gear Cat Behaviour General Ask a Vet About Us Contact Terms of Service Privacy Policy © All Rights Reserved Hepper. 2023 

Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Sign In Breeds A-Z Expert Advice Products & Services Sports & Events Clubs & Delegates Breed Explorer View All Breeds Find By Breed Name Select A Breed Affenpinscher Afghan Hound Airedale Terrier Akita Alaskan Klee Kai Alaskan Malamute American Bulldog American English Coonhound American Eskimo Dog American Foxhound American Hairless Terrier American Leopard Hound American Staffordshire Terrier American Water Spaniel Anatolian Shepherd Dog Appenzeller Sennenhund Australian Cattle Dog Australian Kelpie Australian Shepherd Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog Australian Terrier Azawakh Barbado da Terceira Barbet Basenji Basset Fauve de Bretagne Basset Hound Bavarian Mountain Scent Hound Beagle Bearded Collie Beauceron Bedlington Terrier Belgian Laekenois Belgian Malinois Belgian Sheepdog Belgian Tervuren Bergamasco Sheepdog Berger Picard Bernese Mountain Dog Bichon Frise Biewer Terrier Black and Tan Coonhound Black Russian Terrier Bloodhound Bluetick Coonhound Boerboel Bohemian Shepherd Bolognese Border Collie Border Terrier Borzoi Boston Terrier Bouvier des Flandres Boxer Boykin Spaniel Bracco Italiano Braque du Bourbonnais Braque Francais Pyrenean Braque Saint-Germain Brazilian Terrier Briard Brittany Broholmer Brussels Griffon Bull Terrier Bulldog Bullmastiff Cairn Terrier Canaan Dog Cane Corso Cardigan Welsh Corgi Carolina Dog Catahoula Leopard Dog Caucasian Shepherd Dog Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Central Asian Shepherd Dog Cesky Terrier Chesapeake Bay Retriever Chihuahua Chinese Crested Chinese Shar-Pei Chinook Chow Chow Cirneco dell’Etna Clumber Spaniel Cocker Spaniel Collie Coton de Tulear Croatian Sheepdog Curly-Coated Retriever Czechoslovakian Vlcak Dachshund Dalmatian Dandie Dinmont Terrier Danish-Swedish Farmdog Deutscher Wachtelhund Doberman Pinscher Dogo Argentino Dogue de Bordeaux Drentsche Patrijshond Drever Dutch Shepherd English Cocker Spaniel English Foxhound English Setter English Springer Spaniel English Toy Spaniel Entlebucher Mountain Dog Estrela Mountain Dog Eurasier Field Spaniel Finnish Lapphund Finnish Spitz Flat-Coated Retriever French Bulldog French Spaniel German Longhaired Pointer German Pinscher German Shepherd Dog German Shorthaired Pointer German Spitz German Wirehaired Pointer Giant Schnauzer Glen of Imaal Terrier Golden Retriever Gordon Setter Grand Basset Griffon Vendéen Great Dane Great Pyrenees Greater Swiss Mountain Dog Greyhound Hamiltonstovare Hanoverian Scenthound Harrier Havanese Hokkaido Hovawart Ibizan Hound Icelandic Sheepdog Irish Red and White Setter Irish Setter Irish Terrier Irish Water Spaniel Irish Wolfhound Italian Greyhound Jagdterrier Japanese Akitainu Japanese Chin Japanese Spitz Japanese Terrier Jindo Kai Ken Karelian Bear Dog Keeshond Kerry Blue Terrier Kishu Ken Komondor Kromfohrlander Kuvasz Labrador Retriever Lagotto Romagnolo Lakeland Terrier Lancashire Heeler Lapponian Herder Large Munsterlander Leonberger Lhasa Apso Löwchen Maltese Manchester Terrier (Standard) Manchester Terrier (Toy) Mastiff Miniature American Shepherd Miniature Bull Terrier Miniature Pinscher Miniature Schnauzer Mountain Cur Mudi Neapolitan Mastiff Nederlandse Kooikerhondje Newfoundland Norfolk Terrier Norrbottenspets Norwegian Buhund Norwegian Elkhound Norwegian Lundehund Norwich Terrier Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever Old English Sheepdog Otterhound Papillon Parson Russell Terrier Pekingese Pembroke Welsh Corgi Perro de Presa Canario Peruvian Inca Orchid Petit Basset Griffon Vendéen Pharaoh Hound Plott Hound Pointer Polish Lowland Sheepdog Pomeranian Pont-Audemer Spaniel Poodle (Miniature) Poodle (Standard) Poodle (Toy) Porcelaine Portuguese Podengo Portuguese Podengo Pequeno Portuguese Pointer Portuguese Sheepdog Portuguese Water Dog Pudelpointer Pug Puli Pumi Pyrenean Mastiff Pyrenean Shepherd Rafeiro do Alentejo Rat Terrier Redbone Coonhound Rhodesian Ridgeback Romanian Carpathian Shepherd Romanian Mioritic Shepherd Dog Rottweiler Russell Terrier Russian Toy Russian Tsvetnaya Bolonka Saint Bernard Saluki Samoyed Schapendoes Schipperke Scottish Deerhound Scottish Terrier Sealyham Terrier Segugio Italiano Shetland Sheepdog Shiba Inu Shih Tzu Shikoku Siberian Husky Silky Terrier Skye Terrier Sloughi Slovakian Wirehaired Pointer Slovensky Cuvac Slovensky Kopov Small Munsterlander Smooth Fox Terrier Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier Spanish Mastiff Spanish Water Dog Spinone Italiano Stabyhoun Staffordshire Bull Terrier Standard Schnauzer Sussex Spaniel Swedish Lapphund Swedish Vallhund Taiwan Dog Teddy Roosevelt Terrier Thai Bangkaew Thai Ridgeback Tibetan Mastiff Tibetan Spaniel Tibetan Terrier Tornjak Tosa Toy Fox Terrier Transylvanian Hound Treeing Tennessee Brindle Treeing Walker Coonhound Vizsla Volpino Italiano Weimaraner Welsh Springer Spaniel Welsh Terrier West Highland White Terrier Wetterhoun Whippet Wire Fox Terrier Wirehaired Pointing Griffon Wirehaired Vizsla Working Kelpie Xoloitzcuintli Yakutian Laika Yorkshire Terrier Explore by characteristic or group Select Characteristic or Group Smallest Dog Breeds Medium Dog Breeds Largest Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds of Dogs Hypoallergenic Dogs Best Family Dogs Best Guard Dogs Best Dog Breeds for Kids Best Dogs for Apartments Hairless Dog Breeds Best Dogs For Apartment Dwellers Large Dog Breeds Smartest Breeds Of Dog Apartment Dogs Sporting Group Hound Group Working Group Terrier Group Toy Group Non-Sporting Group Herding Group Miscellaneous Class Foundation Stock Service Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Compare Breeds Compare up to 5 different breeds side by side Find a Puppy Browse the AKC Marketplace to find the right puppy for you Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Featured Names The Most Popular Dog Names of 2022 Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Answer a few simple questions and find the right dog for you Dog Name Finder Browse our extensive library of dog names for inspiration Can My Dog Eat____? Find out the best and worst foods for your dog and which to avoid Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products Shop Dog Products Breed-Specific Products Dog Toys & Treats Training Products Dog Gift Packs DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog Register a Purebred Dog Register a Litter Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Registration Downloadable Forms AKC Marketplace Find a Puppy AKC Rescue Network PuppyVisor Search Counselor Breeder Referral Contacts Dog Training Services Canine Good Citizen (CGC) GoodDog Helpline Find a Training Club Health & Dog Care Find a Dog Groomer AKC Pet Insurance AKC Reunite Microchips AKC Veterinary Network AKC S.A.F.E. Grooming Program Breeder Programs & Services Breeder Toolkit Breeder E-Z Reg Breeder Of Merit Program Bred With H.E.A.R.T Program Breeder Education AKC Canine College Browse All Services Featured Products Video Training Consultations PURCHASE NOW GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Match Shows 4-6 Month Beginner Puppy Puppy of Achievement National Owner Handled Series FSS Open Show Companion Sports Agility Obedience Rally Tracking Title Recognition Program Public Service Dog Barn Hunt Disc Dog Diving Dogs Flyball Search & Rescue Parent Club Title Recognition Performance Sports Field Events for Hounds Coursing, CAT & FAST CAT Earthdog Herding & Farm Dog Pointing Breeds Retrievers Scent Work Spaniels & Flushing Breeds Sports for Juniors Junior Showmanship Juniors in Companion Events Juniors in Performance Events PeeWee Special Attractions AKC Family Dog Program CGC & AKC S.T.A.R. Puppy AKC Trick Dog AKC Therapy Dog AKC Fit Dog AKC Temperament Test RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Share: Search Sign In Menu Breeds A-Z View All Breeds Choosing The Right Breed Find Your Match Compare Breeds Find a Puppy Prospective Owners Choose Your Breed Why Get a Dog? Finding a Responsible Breeder Getting Started in Dog Sports All About Puppies Additional Resources Find a Purebred Puppy Register Your Dog Find a Breed Club Most Popular Dog Breeds For Dog Breeders For Dog Owners Expert Advice Browse By Topic Dog Breeds Dog Health Dog Nutrition Dog Training Travel & Adventure Life With Dogs Puppy Info Flea & Tick Senior Dog Health Dog Sports Dog Breeding All Categories Tools & Quizzes Find Your Match Dog Name Finder Can My Dog Eat____? Additional Resources AKC.TV AKC Magazines Newsletters Press Center AKC Detection Dog Task Force AKC Canine College Government Relations AKC Education AKC Library & Archives Products & Services Products Shop Dog Products DNA & Health Testing DNA Kit Activation AKC Magazines Pedigrees Breeder Reports AKC Competitor Reports Services Register Your Dog AKC Marketplace Dog Training Services Health & Dog Care Breeder Programs & Services AKC Canine College Browse All Services Sports & Events GETTING STARTED IN DOG SPORTS Intro to Dog Sports Canine Partners / Enroll Mixed Breed Titles & Abbreviations Which Sport Should You Do With Your Dog? Get Started in Dog Training Virtual Dog Sports & Events Featured Events See Upcoming Events AKC National Tracking Invitational AKC National Championship AKC Agility Invitational Obedience Classic AKC Meet the Breeds AKC National Obedience Championship AKC Rally National Championship Browse All Dog Sports Conformation Dog Shows Companion Sports Title Recognition Program Performance Sports Sports for Juniors AKC Family Dog Program RESOURCES FOR DOG SPORT PARTICIPANTS Event Search Title Application Portal Downloadable Forms Rules & Regulations Online Event Management Points & Awards Judging Resource Center Judges Directory Judges Education - AKC Canine College AKC Weekly Winners Event Cancellations Award Corrections AKC Contact Info for All Sports AKC Registered Handler Program Junior Resources Cluster Coordination Clubs & Delegates Find a Club Search All AKC Clubs Find an Event Clubs Offering: Training Classes Clubs About Club Relations Club Bylaw Services Club Development Department Promote a Club Club Resources AKC Centennial Clubs For Delegates Delegate Portal Delegate Directory & Search Delegate Meeting Dates Board Minutes Delegate Standing Committees Perspectives Newsletter AKC Gazette The Role of an AKC Delegate The Importance of Your AKC Delegate Government Relations Legislative Action Center Legislative Alerts AKC PAC and Legislative Support Fund Government Relations Department AKC Library & Archives Overview of Collections Breed Club Archives Search the Library Catalog How to Visit and/or Donate Event Search Find a Puppy Register Shop AKC TV Home Expert Advice Help & Advice Why does my dog... How To Read Dog Body Language Back To Why does my dog... How To Read Dog Body Language By Stephanie Gibeault, MSc, CPDT Published: Jan 27, 2020 | 5 Minutes Updated: Jun 22, 2023 Published: Jan 27, 2020 | 5 Minutes Updated: Jun 22, 2023 ktmoffitt/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images communication Dog body language involves a series of unique methods for communicating emotions and intentions. It can be quite different from how humans communicate with one another. A lot of canine communication consists of barks, whines, and growls, so it’s important to know what dog sounds mean. More often, though, dogs rely on nonverbal body language. That can lead to plenty of human-dog misunderstandings. Sometimes, dog body language is simply unfamiliar (after all, people don’t have tails). At other times, it’s in direct contrast with what that same signal means to a human, such as when it comes to yawning or looking away. To better communicate with your canine companion, learn some tips on reading dog body language. Tail-Wagging Tail-wagging seems like an obvious body language signal. If a dog’s tail is wagging, the dog is happy, right? Wrong. People misinterpret this signal all the time. All a wagging tail means is that the dog is emotionally aroused. It could be excitement, but it could be frustration or worse. To interpret the dog’s emotions and intentions, look at the speed and direction of the wag, as well as the position of the tail. Basically, the faster the wag, the more aroused the dog. Think about those long, slow, side-to-side tail sweeps your dog makes when greeting you — the type that wags the dog’s whole body. That’s a relaxed dog. A faster, twitch-like wag indicates a higher level of arousal, possibly in a negative way. Think of a guard dog on alert. ©Dogs - stock.adobe.com The direction of the wag may hold clues as well. A study on tail-wagging showed that dogs tend to wag their tails more to the right when feeling positive about something, like interacting with their owner. Tails wagged more to the left when dogs faced something negative. Then, there’s the helicopter tail wag (where the dog’s tail spins in a circle). Without question, that’s a happy wag. You’ll usually see it when a dog is greeting a beloved person. Finally, the position of the dog’s tail relative to the ground holds important clues about their emotional state. Essentially, the higher the tail, the more assertive the dog. Dogs with their tails pointing down to the ground or even tucked between their legs are feeling fear and stress. Dogs with their tails held up like a flag are feeling confident, perhaps even aggressive. Relaxed dogs hold their tails in a neutral position, but neutral depends on the breed. Some breeds, such as the Chow Chow, have tails that naturally curl over their backs, whereas some other breeds, like the Italian Greyhound, have a very low neutral tail position. If you get to know your dog’s neutral tail position, you will more quickly recognize when their emotions have shifted. Raised Hackles When a dog’s hackles are raised, it means the hair along their back is standing up. Technically called piloerection, the fur can fluff up across the shoulders or down the back and all the way to the tail. This is a definite sign that the dog is aroused, but not necessarily in a negative way. The dog might be upset or stressed but could also be excited or intensely interested in something. It’s often an involuntary reaction, like goosebumps in people. Posture A dog’s weight distribution can tell a lot about mood and intention. Consider a cowering dog that is hunched toward the ground. That’s a sign of fear or stress. The dog may be trying to get away from something and the posture makes the dog appear smaller. In other words, it says, “I mean no harm.” The extreme of this posture is a dog that rolls onto their back, exposing their belly. This may look like a dog soliciting a belly rub, and in a relaxed dog, it often is. But it can actually be a sign of considerable stress and anxiety. The dog may even urinate a little in appeasement. The opposite posture is a dog with their weight shifted forward. This dog is trying to get closer to something. This might simply indicate the dog’s interest. But it could also indicate offensive intentions, particularly paired with other aggressive body language cues like a twitching tail held high. In this case, the dog is trying to appear larger. Marielle - stock.adobe.com An easy-to-read aspect of dog body language is the play bow. This is when dogs place their chest on the ground with their rump in the air. As the name implies, it’s used to initiate play with other dogs and even with people. A less easily understood signal is the paw raise. In pointing breeds like the English Setter, the paw raise is part of pointing behavior, where the dog indicates nearby prey. But outside of this context, a raised paw often indicates a dog is uncertain about a situation or perhaps feels a bit insecure. Facial Expressions Dogs have similar facial features as people, but they don’t use them in the same way. Consider yawning. People yawn when they’re tired or bored, but dogs yawn when they’re stressed. According to Turid Rugaas, author of On Talking Terms With Dogs: Calming Signals, dogs use yawning to calm themselves in tense situations and to calm others, including their owners. She suggests yawning at your dog to provide comfort at stressful moments like a vet visit. But don’t be surprised if your dog yawns back. Just as yawning is contagious in people, dogs can “catch” yawns, too. Lip-licking is another bit of dog body language that people often misinterpret. Just like people, dogs will lick their lips after a delicious meal, but they will also do it when they feel anxious. Sometimes the tongue flick is so quick it’s tricky to notice. Your dog isn’t signaling a desire to lick your face, but rather discomfort with a given situation. The most confusing facial expression is smiling. Yes, some dogs smile, and if you’re not familiar with the expression it can look terrifying. Usually, when dogs bare their teeth, it serves as a warning, as if they’re saying, “Look at my weapons.” It’s hard to mistake the aggressive intention of a snarl, especially when it’s paired with a menacing growl. The corners of the dog’s lips form the shape of a C and the front teeth are fully displayed. Smiling dogs also display their front teeth, but the meaning is the complete opposite. Also known as a submissive grin, this expression is often found on a happy dog with a loose and wiggly posture. The dog’s overall attitude says, “Hello, I come in peace.” Eyes You can learn a lot about your dog’s internal state by looking at the eyes. First, a dog’s eyes can be soft or hard. Soft eyes have relaxed lids and sometimes look like the dog is squinting. They indicate the dog is calm or happy. The opposite is hard eyes, where the eyes seem to go cold. These indicate a negative state of mind, and you’ll know them when you see them. The dog might be guarding a toy or feeling aggressive. A hard stare, where the dog looks intently at something, especially for a long time, usually signals a threat. Eye contact is an important signal for dogs. Just as the hard stare can be a precursor to aggression, looking away is meant to calm a situation. When dogs feel stressed, they will pointedly look away and avoid eye contact. People often interpret this as their dog ignoring them or being stubborn, but the dog is expressing discomfort. ©Dogs - stock.adobe.com The whites of the eyes are another key indicator. Known as “whale eye,” when a dog shows the whites of the eyes, it’s a signal they are feeling anxious or stressed in a situation. You might see them when you make your dog uncomfortable, like when you pat your dog on the head, or when they’re afraid someone will steal a bone or toy. Deciphering Dog Body Language None of these dog body language signals act alone. They are all part of a package. So, when you read a dog’s communication, look at every signal the dog is using from the tail height to the eye shape. Your dog is “talking” to you all the time. If you learn what your dog is saying, you will develop a deeper bond of trust and respect. Plus, your newfound understanding of your dog’s emotional state will help you predict your dog’s behavior and prevent problems before they occur. Related article: Do Dogs Sniff to Get Their Social Media Fix? https://www.akc.org/wp-admin/admin-ajax.php Get Your Free AKC eBook Canine Body Language Your Dog is Trying to Tell You Something. Dogs communicate their wants, needs, happiness and fear primarily through body language. Are you ready to learn what your dog is trying to tell you? Download this e-book to learn more. SUBMIT *Turn off pop-up blocker to download DOWNLOAD E-BOOK *Turn off pop-up blocker to download AKC Privacy Policy AKC is a participant in affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to akc.org. If you purchase a product through this article, we may receive a portion of the sale. TOP Founded in 1884, the not-for-profit AKC is the recognized and trusted expert in breed, health, and training information for all dogs. AKC actively advocates for responsible dog ownership and is dedicated to advancing dog sports. ABOUT US + About AKC Our Mission Our History Minutes & Reports AKC Library & Archives Awards & Honors Press Center Board of Directors & Executive Officers Careers Newsletter Subscriptions Contact Us Top Services + Find a Puppy Find a Dog Groomer Register Enroll a Mixed-Breed Dog Dog Training Help Shop AKC Store Top Resources + Delegates Portal Downloadable Forms Rules, Regulations & Policies Answer Center Judges' Directory Government Relations Inspections & Compliance Working It Out℠ Guide & FAQs Active Shooter & Mass Attack Safety Resources Get Involved + Attend a Dog Show Participate in an Event Donate to AKC Find a Dog Club AKC Humane Fund Favorite Things + Watch Dog Shows Top 100 Girl Dog Names Top 100 Boy Dog Names Most Popular Dog Breeds Hypoallergenic Dog Breeds Why Do Dogs Eat Poop? Why Is My Dog Limping? How to Remove a Tick How to Potty Train a Puppy CBD Oil for Dogs Best Dog Podcast Best Calming Treats for Dogs Advertise With AKC Terms of Use Privacy & Cookies CA Privacy Rights Website Info & FAQs Linking Policy Material Reproduction Policy © The American Kennel Club, Inc. 2022. All rights reserved. 

Skip Navigation Where To Buy Sign Up & Save For Dogs FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint For Cats FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Learn Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Contact Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Skip Navigation For Dogs For Cats Learn Contact FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Where To Buy Sign Up & Save Home Dog Care: What's New? Behavior & Appearance 12 Dog Behaviors & What They Mean Interpreting Common Dog Behaviors & the Meaning Behind His Moods tags behavior-appearance Dog Published by min read Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Find food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Shop All Cat Food Find a dog food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Find a cat food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Cat Food Your pup's actions tell you a lot about his mood. And although you may not be fluent in the canine tongue–short of what it means when it salivates–you do need to learn how to interpret dog behavior. Have you ever witnessed your dog licking certain textures or circling the same spot in front of you? There are many reasons a specific dog state of mind or health concern may cause him to do these things. Once you pay attention to his behavior, you'll be able to help him. 1. Bad Breath Dogs aren't known for having wonderfully minty breath, but if you notice a marked change with even a little halitosis, it might be time to take a trip to the veterinarian. There could be something wrong with your dog's oral health. A change in the smell of your dog's breath may also be a cause for concern with respect to his gastrointestinal tract, liver, or kidneys. If your dog's breath smells of urine, for instance, he could have a kidney problem. Sweet-smelling breath is a sign to vets that your dog may have diabetes (especially if he's drinking more water and urinating more often). His overall dog mood may appear happy, but if his breath has changed, pay attention - let your veterinarian know. 2. Biting Puppies may nip at you as they learn how to communicate with their pet parents. This usually happens while playing, as young dogs often communicate with their mouths when they interact. It may also happen during training, or for simply no reason you can identify. If your young one is nipping regularly, though, it's important to stop it before it develops into a more problematic dog behavior down the line. Dogs bite out of anxiety, fear, or aggression. Can you identify which is motivating your pet to do so? Is his mood influencing his actions? If you're having trouble teaching your dog not to bite, consider working with a professional trainer, or better yet, a veterinary behaviorist. Your veterinarian should be able to recommend one for you. 3. Circling Dogs who can't stop walking in circles may have a health issue. Yes, sometimes it's fun to chase your tail, but if your pup can't shake the compulsion, there's a problem beneath the surface. Ear infections may cause circling, but compulsive tail chasing may occur with bull terriers Of course there may be other reasons your buddy is circling. Older dogs may suffer from idiopathic vestibular syndrome, and, not to alarm you, but all dogs are at risk for poisoning or a brain tumor. Only your vet can determine the cause of your dog's circling, so get him in for a checkup. 4. Digging Dogs dig in the ground for many reasons: to escape, to track animals, to make a cool spot to lie, or to hide something important to them. However, some dogs "dig" inside as well. Have you ever noticed your dog scratching at the blankets or couch in order to find the perfect place to lie down? This dog behavior happens most often at night and during nap times, and it is completely normal. If your dog's digging starts to bother you, or damage your furniture, consider working with a professional trainer to reduce this stubborn habit. 5. Eating poop Dogs eat feces for many reasons; it can be a normal (while distasteful to us) dog behavior. Young dogs may watch their mother clean them (who ingests feces as a result), and mimic her. Fear may even cause your dog to eat feces if he's afraid of the repercussions. Then again, your dog may just be curious. He may smell certain scents in the feces and wonder what it tastes like. Eating poop can also be an instinctive solution to a nutritional deficiency. Make sure you feed your dog a well-balanced food like Hill's Science Diet, so you can completely rule out malnutrition as a reason for his eating waste. Contact your veterinarian especially if your dog is losing weight as well. 6. Head Pressing If you notice your dog pressing his head against the wall or another firm object, there's a need for your immediate attention. Head pressing is a common sign of numerous serious problems, such as toxic poisoning or brain disease. Make an appointment with your dog's vet right away. 7. Panting Dogs expel most of their body heat from their mouths. When your dog pants, he's probably too warm, so he is regulating his body temperature. However, it's important to pay attention to panting, as he may do it when in pain as well. Help your pal regulate his temperature and make sure he's well hydrated before any physical activity–especially as the weather warms up. If your dog was injured, get him to the vet immediately. Some other health problems may also show increased panting as a sign, so if you have a question, don't hesitate to contact your vet. 8. Sitting on Your Feet or Between Your Legs This is often mistaken for possessive behavior, but is most often a sign of anxiety or nervousness. "Dominance" is rarely the problem; your dog is probably trying to feel safer by staying close. Anxiety is often more than a dog trainer is qualified to help with so discuss the behavior with your veterinarian and see if your dog would benefit from a referral to a veterinary behavior specialist. 9. Scooting Have you ever watched your dog drag himself across the floor . . . with his bottom on the ground? It may seem funny (or kind of disgusting). But it is also called scooting, and it means there's something irritating your dog's anus. It's possible that your pup's anal sacs are full and need to be expressed. If your dog's anal sacs aren't backed up, the problem could be irritation for some other reason. Allergies may only show up as an itchy rear. While it's common to blame worms, it is an uncommon reason for the behavior. Check with your veterinarian to be sure your pal is on an appropriate parasite prevention program. Finally, a dog who's a grass-eater, or likes to lick around the house, could have strands of grass or hair trapped in his anus that he's rubbing the ground to get out. This is the least-severe reason for scooting but the easiest for you to help him take care of. 10. Urinating If your dog is house trained, it may come as a surprise if you see him urinating in your home. Dog behavior doesn't usually change without reason. Formerly reliable dogs who suddenly begin urinating inside need your attention! This is a sign that something may be very wrong with your furry friend, and when he relieves himself frequently–even if he is in the correct location–it can be a sign of a urinary tract, bladder, or kidney infection. In an older dog, it may even be a sign of dementia. 11. Yawning Although you might think he needs some sleep, a dog yawn doesn't usually mean he's tired. He may be interested in napping, but he could also be showing a sign of fear or stress. If your dog appears to yawn at an increased rate around a new person, don't rush the introduction. He's either picking up vibes he doesn't feel comfortable with, or is fearful for a less-obvious reason. No matter what the case, a forced introduction isn't a good idea. 12. Anxiety Shows in Many Ways Signs of anxiety include shaking, tail tucking, escapist behavior, defecating in the home, biting or injuring himself, barking, and many more, according to PetMD. Because they're technically pack animals, your dog may become fearful when left alone. If separation anxiety is a chronic issue for your dog, you'll both need to learn how to create a relaxing environment when you leave the house. Consider taking your dog for a long walk or play a rigorous game of fetch in your backyard to tire him out before you go. Don't make a big deal out of your departure, either. If you're still having trouble with separation anxiety, consider involving a professional who can work on behavioral training. If your dog is experiencing any of these behaviors, and it's not normal for him, don't hesitate to make an appointment with his vet to rule out any systemic medical issues. Your once social, extremely energetic dog won't suddenly become lethargic and withdrawn. If he does, he's asking for some help. Contributor Bio Erin Ollila Erin Ollila believes in the power of words and how a message can inform, and even transform its intended audience. Her writing can be found all over the internet and in print, and includes interviews, ghostwriting, blog posts, and creative nonfiction. Erin is a geek for SEO and all things social media. She graduated from Fairfield University with an M.F.A. in Creative Writing. Reach out to her on Twitter @ReinventingErin or learn more about her at http://erinollila.com. Related Articles Related Products Related Articles Does My Pet Hate Me? Discover if your dog or cat actually hates you, or the reason why they seem to have a standoffish personality. How Pets Help Ease the Transition to an Empty Nest If you're struggling with the future of an empty nest as your kids go to college or move away, pets can help ease that transition. The Aging Differences Between Humans and Pets Learn about the signs of aging in dogs and cats and how they compare similarly to those in humans so you can provide the best care for your aging pet. When is a Puppy an Adult Dog? By one year old, you puppy will be an adult dog – some behaviors may not change any time soon, but his needs in many areas have changed. Related products Hill's Science Diet Adult Large Breed Chicken & Barley Recipe Dog Food Supports healthy joints, immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful coat Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Small & Mini Savory Stew with Chicken & Vegetables Dog Food A delicious complement to the nutrition of <span class='nowrap'>Science Diet</span> Small Paws™ dry dog food Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Small Paws Savory Stew with Beef & Vegetables Dog Food A delicious complement to the nutrition of <span class='nowrap'>Science Diet</span> Small Paws™ dry dog food Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Large Breed Lamb Meal & Brown Rice Recipe Dog Food Supports healthy joints, immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful coat Buy Now » Our Brands Prescription Diet Science Diet Browse By Age For Dogs Puppy Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) For Cats Kitten Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) Education Cat Articles And Tips Dog Articles and Tips Nutritional Philosophy About Hill's Our Company Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Careers Create or Manage a Business Account Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Shelter Partners Natural Disaster Support United States [English] (opens a modal dialog) FacebookTwitterPinterestInstagramYoutube Hillsvet.com Site Map Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Do Not Sell My Personal Information ©2021 Hill's Pet Nutrition, Inc. As used herein, denotes registered trademark status in the U.S. only; registration status in other geographies may be different. Your use of this site is subject to the terms of our Legal Statement. About our Ads. Cookie Consent Tool PLEASE SELECT YOUR PREFERRED LOCATION AND LANGUAGE Argentina Australia Austria - Österreich Беларусь Belgium - België Belgium - Belgique Belize Bolivia Brazil - Brasil България Canada (English) Canada (Français) Chile Colombia Costa Rica Croatia - Hrvatska Cyprus - English Cyprus - Greek Czech Republic - Česká Republika Denmark - Danmark Dominican Republic - República Dominicana Ecuador Eesti Finland - Suomi France - France Грузия Germany - Deutschland Greater China - Hong Kong SAR Greater China - Hong Kong SAR – (English) Greater China - Taiwan Greece - Ελλάδα Guatemala Honduras Magyarország India Indonesia Ireland ישראל Italy - Italia 日本 Latvia - Latvija Lietuva Malaysia (Bahasa) México Netherlands - Nederland New Zealand Nicaragua Norway - Norge Panamá Paraguay Peru Philippines (English) Poland - Polska Portugal Puerto Rico (English) Puerto Rico (Español) 대한민국 Republic of Singapore (English) România Russia - Россия Srbija Slovensko Slovenija South Africa Spain - España Sweden - Sverige Switzerland (Suisse) Switzerland (Schweiz) Svizzera Thailand - ไทย Turkey - Türkiye United Kingdom Ukraine - Україна United Arab Emirates (English) United States Uruguay Venezuela 

Skip to content Menu Menu Fall Apples Fall Drinks Halloween Pumpkin Spice Good News Viral Stories Entertainment Celebrities Movies & TV Music Books Food Recipes Easy Desserts New Food Flavors New Menu Items Home Cleaning & Organization Gardening Crafts DIY & Improvement Life Family Health Money Tips & Advice Travel Air Travel Cruises Trains Adobe Common dog behaviors and what they meanHave you ever wondered why do they do that? We've got answers! March 10, 2021June 23, 2023 by Claire Gillespie Have you ever looked at your dog when it’s doing something and thought, “What’s going on?” You’re not alone. As much as we love our four-legged friends and care for them as furry family members, there’s no getting away from the fact that they’re a completely different species with their own dog behaviors. While every dog has its own unique personality and characteristics, some dog habits apply across the board. Here are some of the most common dog behaviors and what they usually mean. Howling A dog that howls a lot can be an earache — literally. But remember that dogs can’t talk, so they have to use other ways to alert you to danger. “Most dogs are wired to sense danger,” says Claudine Sievert, D.V.M., a cat and dog veterinary doctor from Kansas and veterinary consultant at CatPet. So when your dog howls, it could mean that your pet has sensed danger or is uncomfortable with the presence of a stranger. But howling may also be a dog’s way of communicating with its people (when it’s left alone, for instance), and some breeds are more prone to howling than others. According to the American Kennel Club, Siberian Huskies howl regularly, using their howl to “talk” and express a whole range of emotions. There’s some overlap between howling and barking; some dogs bark when they sense danger, or are wary of a stranger. Other common reasons for barking are excitement, attention-seeking, boredom, fear, and pain, says PetMD. Like howling, the key to understanding this behavior is to look at their body language, then identify the stimulus causing the bark. Adobe Looking At You Before Doing Something Some owners may think that if their dog looks at them before doing something it is a sign of guilt or defiance, but this isn’t true, says dog trainer Steffi Trott. “Dogs don’t show defiance or guilt in the way humans often interpret it,” Trott explains. “As social animals, dogs enjoy eye contact with humans and often seek it out. Your dog may check in with you for reassurance, to make sure that you are still there or simply because he loves you and enjoys looking at you.” So lap up those looks! Adobe Humping The obvious explanation for a dog who humps everything in sight is that it’s sexually excited, and this is certainly often the case, says The Puppy Academy team. But what you may not know is that humping can also be a sign that your dog is wanting to take control of a situation. Oh, and when it comes to humping targets, anything soft and pliant goes — from stuffed animals to blankets. Adobe Sitting On Your Feet Getting comfortable on your feet is typically a sign that your pup is wanting some love, says The Puppy Academy team. But it could also mean it’s trying to own your space. If you have guests over, or there’s another animal in the house, it might be doing this to “claim ownership” of you (and your feet). Adobe Clinginess Pups are natural bonders, so it’s perfectly normal if your dog follows you around the house. It just wants to be close to you. But when a dog is really clingy (like won’t-leave-you-alone-for-a-second-clingy), it’s a good idea to train it to survive on its own, says Sievert. Try leaving it on its own in a safe space for a short time, and gradually increase this period over a number of days. As soon as it realizes you always come back, it will be happier with some alone time now and again. Adobe Heavy Panting Dogs can’t cool themselves down by sweating (like humans do), so panting is normal behavior for active, happy dogs. Generally, there’s no cause for concern, says Sievert. But extremely heavy panting on a hot day can also be a sign of heat stroke. Other warning signs include restlessness, laying out flat, and not responding to you because they’re so focused on cooling themselves down. If you think your dog has heat stroke, get it seen by your veterinarian straight away. Adobe Running In Circles Dogs love to play and running in circles (also known as “zoomies”) is often a favorite game, says Sievert. In fact, you can join in (ball optional) for a fun bonding experience between you and your pooch. The American Kennel Club says zoomies is a natural dog behavior experienced by dogs of all ages and breeds at times, which is frequently caused by an excess buildup of energy that dogs release in one big burst. Some dogs like to “zoom” at certain times of day, such as the first thing in the morning or in the late evening after being indoors for a long period. However, if you notice your dog is running in circles more often than it should, there may be a health issue. In that case, visit your veterinarian as soon as possible, Sievert advises. Adobe Wagging Tail If there’s a sure sign of a happy dog, it’s a wagging tail: Generally, this one doesn’t really need much explanation. You probably notice your dog wagging its tail when you get home from work or school because it’s so excited to welcome you back. “A wagging tail is a sign of enthusiasm and happiness,” Sievert says. “If your dog wags its tail often, you’re doing a good job!” However, there are exceptions. VCA says a wagging tail may also indicate agitation, negotiation, aggression, submission or curiosity. And wagging speed is an important factor – the faster the wag, the more excited a dog is, while a slow, slight wag may indicate that a dog is insecure or wary about meeting a new person. Adobe Turning In Circles Before Lying Down Turning in circles before lying down is a dog’s form of nesting, say The Puppy Academy team. You’ll probably notice your pup doing this in the evening, before going to bed. “Pups like to make their spot comfy before settling in, just how we may fluff the pillows around us,” they explain. “It can help dogs feel more safe and secure, since they’re getting a sense of control over their bedtime routine by settling down in a position that feels most comfortable.” According to VCA, turning in circles is an act of self-preservation that dogs have inherited from their wolf ancestors – your dog instinctively knows it needs to protect itself in a particular way to avoid an attack. It’s believed that wolves sleep with their noses to the wind to ensure they pick up the scent of potential danger, and circling helps them figure out the direction of the wind. Adobe Submissive Urination As a pack animal, a dog has different ways to show its leader it knows who is boss. One way is to lie on its back and urinate on itself, which is known as submissive urination. According to The Humane Society of the United States, submissive urination is common and normal in puppies, and they usually outgrow the behavior. But the behavior may become an issue for pups who remain timid into adulthood. After checking with your veterinarian that there aren’t any medical issues, you can help your dog build up its confidence with positive reinforcement training methods and a consistent environment and routine. Gradually introduce new situations and people to make sure the dog has positive and happy experiences. Adobe Digging An instinctual behavior all dogs have is digging, and it’s something they do for a wide range of reasons. They might be doing it purely for fun if they don’t have other toys or playmates, or if they get bored when they’re left alone outdoors for long periods of time. In hot weather, dogs may dig holes to lie in to cool down, says The Humane Society of the United States. If the digging is at the roots of trees or shrubs or focused on a single area (rather than the boundaries of the yard), they may be digging to try to catch burrowing animals or insects – this is their hunting instinct coming out. Digging can also be a sign of boredom or excess energy, say The Puppy Academy team, but some dogs will still want to dig even after a long walk. If your dog’s digging isn’t too destructive, the best advice is to let them enjoy it. (And have the right cleaning products to hand to tidy up afterward.) Adobe Butt Scooting Butt scooting might look comical, but it may be a sign that your dog needs to get its anal glands expressed, says Marissa Sunny from Best Friends Animal Society, a sanctuary for homeless and special needs animals. If you’re not sure about doing this yourself, don’t worry; you can take your dog to a local groomer or vet clinic to get this taken care of. But don’t wait too long. “If you see scooting, you need to get them expressed ASAP, as overfilled anal glands can lead to infections and even rupturing,” Sunny warns. Other possible reasons for butt scooting are skin irritation from grooming, food allergies, intestinal parasites or trauma to the anal sacs, says American Kennel Club. To get to the bottom of it, take your dog to the veterinarian for a checkup. Adobe Butt Sniffing Another butt-related behavior dogs display is sniffing other dogs’ butts. “Dogs have a very keen sense of smell and can learn almost everything about another dog just from a quick sniff of his butt,” Sunny explains. “This includes, sex, approximate age, health, and if they’ve met before. The act of sniffing each other’s rear ends also allows both dogs to assess the other’s body language and demeanor to see if this could be a new friend or someone they should keep their distance from.” Basically, a butt sniff is the canine version of a handshake, so let them enjoy it. Adobe Eating Poop (Coprophagia) Eating poop (officially called coprophagia) is gross to us, but it is actually fairly common in dogs, Sunny says. According to a study published in Veterinary Medicine and Science, researchers found that 16% of dogs are “frequent” poop eaters (meaning they’ve been caught doing it at least six times), and concluded that the habit is simply in a dog’s DNA. “Our conclusion is that eating of fresh stools is a reflection of an innate predisposition of ancestral canids living in nature that protects pack members from intestinal parasites present in feces that could occasionally be dropped in the den/rest area,” wrote Dr. Benjamin Hart from the University of California, Davis. However, coprophagia could indicate a medical issue in some cases, so it’s always best to check with your veterinarian in the first instance before trying any behavioral fixes. Adobe Staring Intently Lots of dogs stare at their owners and at other animals, and the meaning depends on the context, says Trott. “Dogs can stare if they are highly motivated, for example if their owner is holding a ball or treat that the dog wants,” she says. “In this case the dog is happy and excited.” But staring can also be a precursor of an escalation between two dogs. “If two dogs that are not friendly are staring at each other and appear ‘frozen,’ you absolutely need to separate them ASAP,” Trott warns. Staring is often seen in play as well, when two dogs slowly approach each other and then start a sudden game of chase. Adobe Squinting Or Blinking Squinting or blinking is a calming signal that dogs do when they are stressed or uncomfortable, or if they want to appear non-threatening, Trott explains. “A dog might blink at the vet, when another dog is barking at him, or when the owner is scolding him,” she says. “Dogs that are well-socialized will also blink in the presence of scared dogs or young puppies to communicate that there is nothing to worry about.” Adobe Puppy-Dog Eyes Those puppy-dog eyes don’t disappear when your dog becomes an adult. Normally, they simply mean your dog is engaged with you in the widest sense and hopeful for some kind of interaction, Trott explains. For instance, your dog may look at you with puppy-dog eyes when you are cutting up steak for dinner. In this case it’s obvious what the pup is hoping for! “A dog who is only allowed on furniture after being invited up there may look at you with puppy-dog eyes to be allowed on the couch,” Trott adds. “Other dogs do this if they want to go for a walk.” Adobe Licking You Licking can happen for lots of reasons, and they aren’t all a “kiss,” says Karen Reese, certified animal trainer and animal behavior manager at Operation Kindness. Sometimes, dogs will lick you as if they are grooming you, similar to what a mother dog does to clean her babies. “This is a soothing gesture and can relax the dog,” Reese explains. On other occasions, a dog may “kiss to dismiss,” meaning it licks in an attempt to get you to move away. “This can be commonly seen when a person is too close to a dog’s face,” Reese says. “You will need to observe the rest of the dog’s body language to determine if the dog is relaxed or tense.” Adobe Kicking Up Grass Or Dirt On the base of a dog’s feet, there are sweat glands known as apocrine sweat glands that secrete pheromones. These are species-specific chemical factors that dogs use to communicate, explains veterinary technologist and canine behavior specialist Nicholas DeRoma. “When a dog kicks after urinating or defecating, it is spreading its scent onto the ground, displaying a distinct marking behavior,” DeRoma says. Adobe Baring Teeth Baring teeth is generally a warning sign that the dog wants a threat to stop, says Reese. “Dogs may bare their teeth in an agonistic pucker; this is when the corners of their lips are drawn forward creating a ‘short lip’ and baring their front teeth,” she explains. Basically, it means back off. Adobe Chewing When you’re a puppy, chewing is a big part of exploring the world. It may also be a way to relieve pain caused by incoming teeth. And when older dogs chew, it’s keeping their jaws strong and their teeth clean. Chewing may also be used to ward off boredom and keep mild anxiety or frustration at bay, says the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA). If your dog is chewing something it shouldn’t be, like furniture, it may be lacking physical and mental stimulation. The ASPCA suggests providing a variety of ways for your dog to exercise its mind and body, such as daily walks and outings, off-leash play with other dogs, fetch games and meals that are fed in food puzzle toys. Adobe Chasing Tail What’s cuter than a dog chasing its tail? This is usually your dog’s way of playing, says Sara Ochoa, DVM, veterinary consultant for DogLab. “They may get bored and want to run after something and their tail is something that they can [go] after — and often never catch,” Ochoa says. Adobe Head Tilt Another cute canine habit is the head tilt. This shows that your dog is engaged in what you’re saying – similar to how humans nod during a conversation to show they’re listening, explains VCA. And while all breeds may do it, social dogs who particularly enjoy human interaction are more frequent head tilters. Sometimes, there may be an underlying medical issue that causes the tilt, like an inner ear infection, so it’s important to get it checked by a veterinarian if it’s causing concern, Ochoa says. If you notice a consistent head tilt that’s not associated with communication, it’s time to make that appointment. According to VCA, middle ear infections are more serious and are often accompanied by a more persistent head tilt, while holding the head to the side may also indicate a neurological problem such as vestibular disease. Adobe Lying In Your Bed When You’re Not There Whatever you think about your dog being on your bed, you can bet it will want to be there any chance it can get. And if it does it when you’re not there, this is down to its inherent pack mentality. “The adults in the house are the leaders of the pack,” Ochoa explains. “If you get to sleep where the leaders sleep, you’re high in the ranking order. Most dogs love to sleep in their owner’s beds so that they are also high in the ranking order.” Adobe Couch Trashing Dogs are incredibly smart creatures, and if they’re left alone for long periods without adequate mental and physical exercise, they will often create their own “jobs,” says Sunny. Unfortunately, this may include chewing up the couch (or pillow, or anything they can easily attack), digging through the trash or digging a hole in the yard. To avoid this, Sunny recommends giving your dog plenty of exercise, mental stimulation and training, so they’re aware of what are appropriate outlets (like playing with their own toys) and what is not (eating the couch and destroying the pillows). Adobe Leaning On You For most dogs, leaning is loving. “My dog will run between my legs and lean on me when she is very excited to see me,” Ochoa reveals. But in some cases, there could be vestibular issues, meaning your dog is leaning on your to keep its balance. If the leaning is something your pooch does all the time and is concerning to you, speak to your veterinarian. Adobe Going Crazy When You Get Home Nothing compares to the welcome you get from your dog when you get home — and in most cases, it doesn’t matter if you’ve been away for 10 minutes or several hours. It’s all to do with the “happy hormone” oxytocin (yes, the same one humans have), which is released when you’re reunited. Remember, dogs are emotional creatures, just like humans, and they show their love towards their human family just like we do – although admittedly, we don’t tend to lick each others’ faces after a day apart. But your dog’s excitement may not be just because it loves you, says Ochoa. It may associate your return with going for a walk, being fed or getting a treat. Adobe Bringing ‘Gifts’ Dogs have a different definition of “gift” than we do. They’ll bring you all sorts of dirty, smelly things from the yard and random objects found throughout the house, and be very proud of their generosity. “Many dogs that enjoy playing with toys with their people will bring a ‘gift’ to someone when they want to play or when they are exhibiting friendly behavior,” Reese explains. “Most often, these dogs are expecting a friendly greeting with the person or maybe a game of tug or fetch.” Adobe Open Mouth With Relaxed Tail An open mouth and relaxed tail is usually a sign of a content dog, says Trott. And if the ears are high, it shows focus and attention; meanwhile, the relaxed tail communicates happiness. If it looks like your dog is baring its teeth at the same time — a little like a grin — this isn’t the same as aggressive teeth-baring, says Reese. “You can tell the difference by looking at the dog’s overall body language but also the corners of the lips will be pulled way back, creating a ‘long lip,'” she explains. But not all dogs will submissively grin, and if yours doesn’t, it’s nothing to worry about. Adobe Cuddling Dogs need affection, company and love to thrive. And sometimes, that extends to actual cuddling. The action releases chemicals that makes it feel good — and it’s bound to make you feel pretty special, too. Adobe Categories Animals, Curiosity, Pets Tags dogs, training Stories you might enjoy Latest Posts This magnesium supplement is my go-to when I need to relax at bedtime This town has had a golden retriever as its mayor since 2012 These popular Hoka running shoe dupes are just $28 Search for: LinksFollow Us on Facebook Follow Us on Twitter About Simplemost Contact Don’t Waste Your Money Reviews RSS Feed LegalTerms Of Use Privacy Policy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Simplemost Media is a Scripps Company brand Copyright 2023 © Simplemost, All Rights Reserved. 

Skip to content Home Train With Cesar Dog Training Dog Psychology 5 Natural Dog Laws Dogs Are Instinctual Energy is Everything Animal, Species, Breed, Name A Dog’s Senses Form Their Reality Dogs are Pack Animals Five Pack Leadership Techniques Project Calm and Assertive Energy Provide Exercise, Discipline, Affection Master the Walk Read Your Dog’s Body Language Dog Care The Basics Choosing/Working With a Vet Vaccinations Spay and Neuter Pet Insurance Nutrition Boarding Your Dog Traveling With Your Dog Dog Law Dog Lifecycle Care Puppy Care Senior Care End of Life Routine Care Bathing Dental Care Ear Care Eye Care Grooming Muscular/Skeletal Care Paw Care Skin Care Health Care Dog Safety Diagnosing Your Dog Allergies Bites, Wounds, and Cuts Fleas and Ticks Diarrhea Foot Injuries Hot Spots Heartworms and Worms First Aid Sick or Pained Dog Poison Vomiting Adoption Tips All About Dogs Dog News Breeds Breeds Guides Adopt Choosing A Compatible Breed/Dog Adopting From a Breeder Adopting From A Shelter Bringing Your New Dog Home Beagle Helping At a Shelter About Shop Contact Contact Us Advertise With Us Media Inquires Menu Home Train With Cesar Dog Training Dog Psychology 5 Natural Dog Laws Dogs Are Instinctual Energy is Everything Animal, Species, Breed, Name A Dog’s Senses Form Their Reality Dogs are Pack Animals Five Pack Leadership Techniques Project Calm and Assertive Energy Provide Exercise, Discipline, Affection Master the Walk Read Your Dog’s Body Language Dog Care The Basics Choosing/Working With a Vet Vaccinations Spay and Neuter Pet Insurance Nutrition Boarding Your Dog Traveling With Your Dog Dog Law Dog Lifecycle Care Puppy Care Senior Care End of Life Routine Care Bathing Dental Care Ear Care Eye Care Grooming Muscular/Skeletal Care Paw Care Skin Care Health Care Dog Safety Diagnosing Your Dog Allergies Bites, Wounds, and Cuts Fleas and Ticks Diarrhea Foot Injuries Hot Spots Heartworms and Worms First Aid Sick or Pained Dog Poison Vomiting Adoption Tips All About Dogs Dog News Breeds Breeds Guides Adopt Choosing A Compatible Breed/Dog Adopting From a Breeder Adopting From A Shelter Bringing Your New Dog Home Beagle Helping At a Shelter About Shop Contact Contact Us Advertise With Us Media Inquires Search Close What Are Common Dog Behaviors? October 17, 2019 Facebook Twitter Instagram Pinterest Communication begins with understanding. If you want to build a better relationship with your dog, you can start by working to understand the meaning and causes behind some of her most common dog behaviors. Here is a list of common dog behaviors and what they mean. Some Prevalent Behaviors in Cannines Dog Panting Because dogs sweat through the pads on their feet, most of their body heat is expelled through their mouth when they pant. It’s their primary means of regulating body temperature. Dogs also pant to cope with pain. Dog Barking In nature, dogs bark to raise an alarm at the first signs of possible danger or to herald a new arrival. Barking is an important means of canine communication. See What your dog’s bark is telling you. Dog Chewing Just as a growing child, your dog will want to chew on toys and other objects to relieve the pain of a new set of teeth coming in. If your dog is full grown, you may also come home to find your couch cushions or favorite pair of shoes ripped to shreds, but it is not because they enjoy the taste. Your dog could be exhibiting signs of separation anxiety or anxiety in general. See 5 steps to correct inappropriate dog chewing. Dog Digging in Your Yard Digging is an instinctual activity, written deep in a dog’s DNA. It is especially strong in terrier breeds. Dogs in natural packs will dig to hide food or to uncover food such as small rodents. A den dug in the cool earth can also provide shelter from the heat. See Cesar’s dog training advice on how to get dogs to stop digging. Jumping Up Though it may seem like play behavior, or an enthusiastic greeting, jumping up is a sign that your dog is attempting to assert her dominance over you. By encouraging jumping up with affection, you are reinforcing the behavior. See Cesar’s training video on how to deal with dogs jumping when excited. Dog Biting A dog will bite a person as a way of communicating their current state of mind. The dog could be reacting in aggression, fear or nervousness. There are, however, ways to prevent a dog bite from ever happening if you stay in tune to the dog’s body language. See Dog bites 101: Why bites happen and how to prevent them. Separation anxiety Dogs live and travel in packs, so it’s natural for them to feel anxious when they are separated from their pack-mates. Try taking your dog on a nice, long walk before leaving her alone in the house. Leaving her in resting mode can calm her anxiety. Once you understand these behaviors, you’ll be better equipped to recognize when your pack’s needs are not being met! When your dog’s needs go unfulfilled, unwanted behaviors begin to emerge. Consider: Are you giving Exercise, Discipline, then Affection? How has your dog misbehaved lately, and how do you plan to solve the issue? Share your story in the comments. Facebook Twitter Pinterest PrevPreviousHave You Posted About Your Dog Today? Next8 Winter Myths DispelledNext More From Cesar's Way Videos Recommended Videos Related Posts September 5, 2023 Essential Qualities Of a Pack Leader: How to Be Pack Leader People ask me all the time, “How can I be a Pack Leader?” Well, there's September 5, 2023 Puppy Crate Training Made Easy There are many reasons you might want to crate train your new puppy. A crate September 5, 2023 Mange: Prevention And Treatment for Dogs You have probably heard the phrase, “That mangy dog!” as a way of expressing annoyance All About Dogs Why Dogs Bury Things August 20, 2020 No Comments Agression My Dog Bit Me — Now What? October 12, 2019 No Comments Agression Cesar’s Best Tips To Stop Dog Barking October 10, 2019 No Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Subscribe to Our Newsletter Get Tips From Cesar & The Pack Don’t get left out of the doghouse! Sign up now to make sure you’re up to date on the latest happenings! Email Address subscribe Trending Today Essential Qualities Of a Pack Leader: How to Be Pack Leader Puppy Crate Training Made Easy Mange: Prevention And Treatment for Dogs Trending This Week Essential Qualities Of a Pack Leader: How to Be Pack Leader Puppy Crate Training Made Easy Mange: Prevention And Treatment for Dogs Newsletter Sign Up Don’t get left out of the doghouse! Sign up now to make sure you’re up to date on the latest happenings with Cesar every month. Submit Help My Dog is...​ Dog Psychology Dog Care Adoption Tips About Cesar Shop Train With Cesar Watch New Show CesarTV All About Dogs From The Pack Advertise With us Contact us FAQs​ Media/Press Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Become a Pack Member Email GO Youtube Instagram Tiktok Facebook-f Twitter Pinterest Copyright 2021 Cesar’s Way. All rights reserved. Help My Dog is...​ Dog Psychology Dog Care Adoption Tips About Cesar Shop FAQs​ Shop Polices Advertise With us Contact us Media/Press Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy All About Dogs From The Pack CESAR ON TV​ Train With Cesar See Cesar Live Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Snapchat Pinterest Copyright 2018 Cesar’s Way. All rights reserved. Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Copyright 2021 Cesar’s Way. All rights reserved. 

Thursday , October 5 2023 About Privacy Policy Contact Us Hall of Fame DogExpress Home Lifestyle 9 Ways to Save Money on Pet Expenses 6 hours ago The Reasons Why a Dog Barks at Night1 day agoAll The Best Meats To Feed Your Dog2 days agoThe Reasons Why a Dog Eat Grass6 days agoCan Dogs Eat Honey? – Benefits Of Honey For Dogs1 week ago10 Key Questions You Should Ask A Veterinarian1 week agoThe Best Pet Sitting Tips for Pet Sitter in 20232 weeks ago Dog Health Diarrhea in Dogs: What You Can Do to Help 1 week ago How To Spot The Signs Of Anxiety In Dog And Comfort Them?2 weeks agoWhat To Feed A Dog With Cancer – Dog Cancer Diet3 weeks agoSome secret tips to help your dog live longer4 weeks agoPreventing Pets Obesity – Pet Owner’s Guide4 weeks agoBest Home Remedies for Combating Mange in Dogs4 weeks ago7 Natural Home Remedies for Itchy DogsAugust 23, 2023 News & Cause Rahul Gandhi’s Heartwarming Surprise: Welcoming Noorie, the New Family Pet 10 hours ago Puppy with Six Legs Discovered Abandoned in Parking Lot2 days agoRatan Tata Seeks Assistance for Stranded Canine in Mumbai on Instagram6 days agoMan Communicates with Deaf Dog Using Sign Language: Watch Heartwarming Interaction1 week agoSuccessful Rescue of Nearly 100 Dogs by Animal Rescue League of Iowa1 week agoMC Initiates Sterilization Program for Urban Street Dogs in Patiala City1 week agoThree Crocodiles Save Dog from River Instead of Attacking1 week ago Dog Stories 10 Amazing Facts about Dogs June 19, 2023 Scientists Discover Dog Brains Growing Larger Against All OddsMay 19, 2023Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3’s Cosmo Draws Inspiration from Laika, the Space DogMay 9, 2023A Man from Thailand Shared the Inspiring Survival Story of Mom Dog and Her PupsMay 5, 2023The Future of Pet Ecommerce IndustryMarch 30, 20235 Reasons Why You Should Adopt Stray Dogs?May 22, 202217 Dog Facts That You Didn’t KnowApril 21, 2022 Dog Breeds Advertise With Us "20% of our website advertising earnings are donated to local NGOs for stray dogs and animal welfare." Express Update Rahul Gandhi’s Heartwarming Surprise: Welcoming Noorie, the New Family Pet Puppy with Six Legs Discovered Abandoned in Parking Lot Ratan Tata Seeks Assistance for Stranded Canine in Mumbai on Instagram Man Communicates with Deaf Dog Using Sign Language: Watch Heartwarming Interaction Successful Rescue of Nearly 100 Dogs by Animal Rescue League of Iowa X Home / Lifestyle / 20 Dog Behaviors & What They Mean 20 Dog Behaviors & What They Mean November 28, 2021 Lifestyle 8982 Share All dog owners would like to know what their pet is thinking about. Sometimes this desire is supported by our dog’s strange behavior. However, it is not that hard to understand your pup’s language. You don’t need to be a magician for this purpose. Table of Contents 20 Dog Behaviors and Meaning1. Squinting or Blinking of the Eyes2. Tongue out Studying You3. Open Mouth (relaxed tail but high ears)4. Straight Pointed Tail and Forward Ears5. Baring Teeth, Ears Back, and Snarling6. Howling7. Superman8. The Fox9. Giving Gifts10. Lying in your Bed11. Head Tilt12. Butt Sniffing13. Chasing their Tail14. Couch Trashing15. Showing Empathy16. Eating Grass17. Eating Feces18. Humping19. Digging20. Raising a Single PawResumeSubscribe to Our Newsletter 20 Dog Behaviors and Meaning 1. Squinting or Blinking of the Eyes That means that your dog needs your attention right now. She is ready to play with you and spend quality time. This dog behavior is a sign that you don’t pay too much attention to your four-legged friend. When was the last time you did something together? You shouldn’t be too busy to show your dog some love. 2. Tongue out Studying You Yeah, sometimes it is too awkward. However, the explanation for this behavior is very simple. It is a sign that your dog is very happy and relaxed right now. That’s how your pet expresses her satisfaction after getting the attention they crave. This behavior means you are a wonderful friend! 3. Open Mouth (relaxed tail but high ears) This behavior is a good sign. If your dog keeps its mouth open and tail relaxed, you don’t have to worry. It means she is neutral, relaxed, and secure. If you want to say hi to your friend’s dog, that’s the best time for this. Do not miss the chance! 4. Straight Pointed Tail and Forward Ears This means that your four-legged friend is very curious about something. Your dog is in a good mood and wants to play. She may also hear, see, or smell something unusual. Your dog may want to know the source of the noise or smell. In other words, she is ready to become Sherlock Holmes. 5. Baring Teeth, Ears Back, and Snarling That’s the simple one. If your dog looks aggressive and angry, she wants to give a warning to her enemy. It is a bad idea to approach a dog when she is in this state. Let it calm down. Even if you are not the source of the threat, you may be hurt. 6. Howling The reasons for howling are simple. Your dog heard a high-pitched sound. This may be some kind of siren or train whistle. However, scientists don’t know till now if it happens because dogs are annoyed, or it is not comfortable for their ears. In fact, it is more of negative emotion. 7. Superman If your dog is laying on its belly, that means she is exhausted (but in a positive way). Many dogs behave so after games with their owners when they have to run or jump to catch a ball. So it is a good sign. It means the game was perfect, and now your four-legged friend needs to have a nap. 8. The Fox If your dog sleeps like a fox (its paws are underneath her and her tail is wrapped around to her face), it means it is cold. This position is perfect if you want to keep some heat. So make sure you find a warm and cozy place for your friend or cover it with a blanket. 9. Giving Gifts If your dog brings you a “gift”, it means she just wants to make you happy. Of course, a dead animal or a shoe is not a good present for a human being, but who cares! The idea is that your dog loves you to bits. So smile at her and pretend you love the present. 10. Lying in your Bed If you happened to find your dog lying in your bed, it is also normal. It means that your pal is missing you. Your bed has your scent, so she just wants to stay close to you even if you are not there. What beautiful behavior. Isn’t it touching? 11. Head Tilt Oh yes, that’s one of the cutest things all dogs do. However, they do not know how charming they are when they do it. The thing is that dogs just want to adjust their outer ear to hear better. That’s how they can focus on the source of the noise. 12. Butt Sniffing Let’s go straight to disgusting habits! Butt sniffing is an absolutely normal dog and cat behavior. It is their way to say hi to each other (thank God human beings don’t have that habit). They also get a lot of information from the scent of a certain dog. That’s how they can recognize her next time. 13. Chasing their Tail That’s also one of the most charming habits. The thing is that your dog doesn’t realize the tail is already hers. She just doesn’t perceive it as a part of her body. Such behavior is normal when your dog is feeling bored and has nothing to play with. Give it a toy! 14. Couch Trashing If you notice that your coach is a total disaster, that means that your dog has separation anxiety. Most of the pups get over it soon, but it is better to spend some time with your four-legged buddy before leaving him alone. Go for a walk and play your dog’s favorite game. 15. Showing Empathy Dogs can’t read minds. However, they know our body language. That’s why they can understand when we are upset. If your dog rests his head on you, that means he wants to know that he feels your pain. That’s their way to comfort you and show their love and devotion. 16. Eating Grass It is also absolutely normal for a dog. However, this may signal that your dog lacks some nutrients in her diet. In such a case it is better to go to your vet and get some tests done. Your pup may have some intestinal worms he is trying to get rid of. 17. Eating Feces And here’s one of the top 3 disgusting habits. However, dogs do it to keep their territory clean. They just don’t want to poop where they eat. Some mother dogs even eat their puppies’ poop to make sure they are clean and safe. That’s just a sign of pure love. 18. Humping Some dog owners think dogs do it because they need a girlfriend/boyfriend. However, there is nothing sexual about it. Dogs just show their dominance by humping things in the house. So it is their way to say who’s the boss here. That’s a cringe habit, but it’s all about nature. 19. Digging That’s another sign that your dog is bored. If you want to save your yard, make sure your dog has a lot of activities throughout the day. Consult your vet and develop a schedule of entertainment for your four-legged friend. That’s how you can be sure your dog won’t feel lonely and bored and will build up his muscles. 20. Raising a Single Paw That means that your dog is highly interested in something. For instance, your pup may find some interesting insects to play with or a new toy. A raised paw may also mean that your pet is hungry or just wants to play. Keep an eye on your dog to make sure you understand when exactly it raises its paw. Resume Of course, there is no Google Translator for your dog’s language. You will never know what exactly your pup is trying to say. However, now you have some main clues to her behavior. Keep an eye on your four-legged friend, study her behavior. Soon you’ll learn to understand your dog much better. Author Bio: My name is Jimmie O’Chutt, I’m the owner of CatPet.club online magazine and a happy companion of Ronnie the cat who taught me how one can love a cat. Subscribe to Our Newsletter For Latest Dog Updates Leave this field empty if you’re human: Facebook Comments dog behaviors Dog Behaviors and Meaning Dog website in India howling latest dog website in India 2021-11-28 dopress-tsgadmin Share Tags dog behaviors Dog Behaviors and Meaning Dog website in India howling latest dog website in India YOU MAY ALSO LIKE 9 Ways to Save Money on Pet Expenses 6 hours ago The Reasons Why a Dog Barks at Night 1 day ago The Reasons Why a Dog Eat Grass 6 days ago RecentTrending 9 Ways to Save Money on Pet Expenses 6 hours ago Rahul Gandhi’s Heartwarming Surprise: Welcoming Noorie, the New Family Pet 10 hours ago The Reasons Why a Dog Barks at Night 1 day ago 22 Dogs Rescued After Two Weeks as Owner at Harris County Dies 1 day ago All The Best Meats To Feed Your Dog 2 days ago Puppy with Six Legs Discovered Abandoned in Parking Lot 2 days ago The Reasons Why a Dog Eat Grass 6 days ago Ratan Tata Seeks Assistance for Stranded Canine in Mumbai on Instagram 6 days ago Can Dogs Eat Honey? – Benefits Of Honey For Dogs 1 week ago Man Communicates with Deaf Dog Using Sign Language: Watch Heartwarming Interaction 1 week ago How Much A Pomeranian Puppy Costs In India? July 14, 2022 977,953 How Much Does a Labrador Puppy Cost in India? October 5, 2021 604,133 Different Types of German Shepherds (With Pictures) August 28, 2020 341,232 12 Best Ways To Improve Dog Milk Production November 12, 2021 186,664 Which Dog Is Best For A Home Pet In India? September 23, 2021 182,336 Dog Price List in India 2023 – Budget Friendly Dog Breed February 16, 2021 167,230 Laws for Pet Owners Living In Apartments February 22, 2016 165,330 Top 10 Dog Breeds With the Strongest Bite Force November 20, 2021 159,327 Top 11 Toy Dog Breeds for Apartment Living in India April 23, 2022 80,706 The Best Pit Bull Diet: How to Properly Feed Them November 18, 2021 74,381 DogExpress is an all-inclusive information hub dedicated towards dogs. This site is packed with information on everything associated to dogs. From dog breeds to dog lifestyle, news, inspiring pet stories and many more! DogExpress acts as your one-stop resource for all information related to dogs. "LIFE IS BETTER WITH A DOG BY YOUR SIDE" Recent Posts 9 Ways to Save Money on Pet Expenses 6 hours ago Rahul Gandhi’s Heartwarming Surprise: Welcoming Noorie, the New Family Pet 10 hours ago The Reasons Why a Dog Barks at Night 1 day ago Quick Links Lifestyle Dog Health News & Cause Dog Stories Dog Breeds DOGEXPRESS WEEKLY NEWSLETTTER Leave this field empty if you're human: Featured On Powered by: Made with in Chandigarh, India. Copyright © 2015-2023 DogExpress. All rights reserved. × GET DOG CARE TIPS SEND TIPS By clicking "SEND TIPS" I agree to the Dog Express Privacy Policy. I also agree to recieve emails from Dog Express and I understand that I may opt out of Dog Expression subscriptions at any time. × Delivered to your inbox every week! THANKYOU FOR SUBSCRIBING TO OUR WEEKLY DOG EXPRESS DOG CARE TIPS! Please check your email for updates. × Close X 

Skip to main content Search n i direct Main navigation Home News Contacts Help Twitter Facebook YouTube RSS Welfare of dogs: normal behaviour patterns The way a healthy dog behaves is individual and depends on its age, breed or type and past experience. However, most dogs are playful, sociable animals and they enjoy playing together with toys, people and other dogs. Changes in behaviour may suggest that something is wrong with a dog’s health. Play for dogsPlay is an important part of getting along with people and other dogs, and although dogs will spend some time playing alone with toys, they should have regular opportunities for interactive playing.Dogs are intelligent animals and can suffer from boredom. If your dog is bored, and does not have enough to do, it may suffer or engage in inappropriate behaviour.Rest for dogsAll dogs, in particular puppies, need rest. However, individual dogs have different needs and some will sleep for long periods after exercise or food; others will need less rest and will be more active.Exercise for dogsA dog needs regular exercise and regular opportunities to walk and to run free under proper supervision.The amount of exercise a dog needs varies with age, breed and health. Some breeds of dog need a lot of exercise and you should take account of this when choosing a dog. Young dogs may need to have their exercise restricted during periods of rapid growth, to avoid developmental problems. Exercising dogs in extremes of weather can lead to unnecessary suffering.Places to walk your dog: Forests, Nature Reserves, Country Parks, Parks and green spacesTraining for dogsTraining a dog, including the house training of puppies, is important to help it learn to behave appropriately and to make it easier to keep under control. Puppies need to get used to the many noises, objects and activities in their environment, some of which are frightening when first experienced.Social environment for dogsGetting accustomed to its social environment is an important part of a puppy’s early experience and helps it to develop normal behaviour. Good training can enhance a dog's quality of life, but punishing a dog can cause it pain, unnecessary suffering and cause longer term behavioural problems.What your dog needs to behave normallyYou should:make sure your dog has enough to do so that it does not become distressed or boredmake sure your dog has access to safe toys and suitable objects to play with and chew and that these activities are properly supervisedmake sure your dog can rest undisturbed when it wants tobe aware that puppies and older animals may need more restprovide your dog with regular opportunities for exercise and play with people or other friendly dogsgive your dog the exercise it needs, at least daily unless your vet recommends something else, to keep your dog fit, active and stimulatedtake advice from your vet or other suitably qualified dog care specialist If you are unsure how much exercise your dog needsget to know the behaviour of your dog when it is fit and healthyseek veterinary advice if you become aware of changes in behaviour, as your dog may be distressed, bored, ill or injuredtrain your dog to behave well, ideally from a very young ageonly use positive reward based training - avoiding harsh, potentially painful or frightening training methodsmake sure children allow dogs to exhibit normal behaviours More useful links Dogs Search for a veterinary practice Share this page Share on Facebook (external link opens in a new window / tab) Share on Twitter (external link opens in a new window / tab) Share by email (external link opens in a new window / tab) Welfare of dogs Welfare of dogs: an introductionWelfare of dogs: getting on with other animalsWelfare of dogs: normal behaviour patternsWelfare of dogs: protection from pain and illnessWelfare of dogs: the need for a suitable dietWelfare of dogs: the need for a suitable environment Translation help How to translate this page Help improve this page - send your feedback You must have JavaScript enabled to use this form. What do you want to do? report a problem leave feedback ask a question Report a problem Which problem did you find on this page? (Tick all that apply) A link, button or video is not working There is a spelling mistake Information is missing, outdated or wrong I can't find what I'm looking for Another issue Messages You will not receive a reply. We will consider your feedback to help improve the site. Don't include any personal or financial information, for example National Insurance, credit card numbers, or phone numbers. Tell us more about the problem you're having with the nidirect website. Enter your feedback What is your question about? Choose a topic for your question: - Select -AnglingBenefitsBirth certificatesBlue BadgeCareersCompensation due to a road problemChild MaintenanceCivil partnership certificatesCoronavirus (COVID-19)COVID vaccination certificateCriminal record checks (AccessNI)Death certificatesEducational Maintenance AllowanceEmployment rightsHigh Street Spend Local SchemeMarriage certificatesMotoringnidirect accountPassportsPenalty Charge NoticesPensionsPRONI - historical recordsRates or property valuationProblems with roads and streetsSmartpassMy question is about something else What to do next Comments or queries about angling can be emailed to anglingcorrespondence@daera-ni.gov.uk If you have a comment or query about benefits, you will need to contact the government department or agency which handles that benefit. Contacts for common benefits are listed below. Carer's Allowance Call 0800 587 0912 Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk Discretionary support / Short-term benefit advance Call 0800 587 2750 Email customerservice.unit@communities-ni.gov.uk Disability Living Allowance Call 0800 587 0912 Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk Employment and Support Allowance Call 0800 587 1377 Jobseeker’s Allowance Contact your local Jobs & Benefits office Personal Independence Payment Call 0800 587 0932 If your query is about another benefit, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. Comments or queries about the Blue Badge scheme can be emailed to bluebadges@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk or you can also call 0300 200 7818. For queries or advice about careers, contact the Careers Service. For queries or advice about Child Maintenance, contact the Child Maintenance Service. For queries or advice about claiming compensation due to a road problem, contact DFI Roads claim unit. If you can’t find the information you’re looking for in the Coronavirus (COVID-19) section, then for queries about: Restrictions or regulations — contact the Department of Health Travel advice (including self-isolation) — contact the Department of Health Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccinations — contact the Department of Health or Public Health Agency If your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk and for queries about your certificate, email covidcertni@hscni.net. For queries or advice about criminal record checks, email ani@accessni.gov.uk Application and payment queries can be emailed to ema_ni@slc.co.uk For queries or advice about employment rights, contact the Labour Relations Agency. For queries or advice about birth, death, marriage and civil partnership certificates and research, contact the General Register Office Northern Ireland (GRONI) by email gro_nisra@finance-ni.gov.uk For queries about the High Street Spend Local Scheme, email HSSS.mail@economy-ni.gov.uk. For queries about:Car tax, vehicle registration and SORNcontact the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA), Swansea Driver licensing and tests, MOT and vehicle testingcontact the Driver & Vehicle Agency (DVA), Northern IrelandIf your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk. For queries or advice about passports, contact HM Passport Office. For queries or advice about Penalty Charge Notices (PCNs), including parking tickets and bus lane PCNs, email dcu@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk For queries or advice about pensions, contact the Northern Ireland Pension Centre. If you wish to report a problem with a road or street you can do so online in this section.If you wish to check on a problem or fault you have already reported, contact DfI Roads. For queries or advice about historical, social or cultural records relating to Northern Ireland, use the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI) enquiry service. For queries or advice about rates, email LPSCustomerTeam@lpsni.gov.uk For queries or advice about 60+ and Senior Citizen SmartPasses (which can be used to get concessionary travel on public transport), contact Smartpass - Translink. If you have a question about a government service or policy, you should contact the relevant government organisation directly. We don't have access to information about you. Extra comments (optional) Related sites gov.uk nibusinessinfo.co.uk Links to supporting information Accessibility statement Crown copyright Terms and conditions Privacy Cookies Twitter Facebook YouTube RSS 

Skip to Main Content Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Menu Find a pet Main menuFind a pet Find a pet Rehome a pet Rehome a pet How to rehome Rehome a horse Rehome a horse How to rehome a horse Foster an animal Foster an animal Horse fostering Advice for adopters Advice for adopters Advice and welfare Main menuAdvice and welfare Advice and welfare Pets Pets Dogs Cats Rabbits Horses Rodents Ferrets Exotic pets Ornamental Fish General Giving up a pet Pet bereavement Find or call a vet Pet theft Brachycephalic animals Lost and found Lab animals Lab animals Phasing out Are animal experiments necessary? Testing chemicals Medicines and vaccines Replacing research animals Reducing research animal suffering Primates and research Biotechnology Farm animals Farm animals Farm animals as pets Slaughter On-farm Live transport Pigs Laying hens Sheep Farmed fish Meat chickens Ducks Dairy cows Beef cattle Turkeys Farmed rabbits Foie Gras Worried about a farm animal? Bovine TB Litter Litter Fishing litter Alternatives to balloons and sky lanterns Single use plastics Sky lanterns Seasonal advice Seasonal advice Spring Summer Autumn Winter Floods Pets at Christmas Diseases Diseases Alabama rot Performing animals Performing animals Guidelines Report concerns FAQs The cost-of-living crisis The cost-of-living crisis Pet cost calculator Food bank Food bank donation point Dog behaviour care costs Wildlife friendly gardening Wildlife friendly gardening The RSPCA wildlife garden Wildlife Wildlife Foxes Squirrels Hedgehogs Otters Seals Bats Rats and mice Rabbits and Hares Find a wildlife rescue centre Wildlife deterrents Injured wild animals Badgers Snakes Deer Wildlife in captivity Wildlife laws Get involved Main menuGet involved Get involved Volunteer Volunteer What can I do? What's it like to volunteer with us? Volunteers' week Big Help Out Campaign Campaign Puppy trade Stun before slaughter Primates as pets Sentient beings Circuses Sanctuaries Farm Animals Better chicken Tougher sentencing Make Wales kinder for animals I'm a Celebrity Stop live exports Animal rehoming Fur Free Britain Gene editing Pets as prizes End the cage age Lab animal regulations Save our breath Join our campaign network Achievements Phase Out Lab Animals Fireworks Slaughterhouses Rabbit breeding End Sky Litter Ear cropping Vapes Better labels better choices End Breed Specific Legislation Act now for animals Donate Donate Leaving a legacy Current appeals Donate in memory Advice for donors Payroll Giving Unwanted items Gift Aid Sponsorship Philanthropy Win Win Raffle Lottery Fundraise Fundraise Virtual challenges At school Animal Hero Running Trekking Cycling Training hub Own place in an event Ideas and resources Fundraising pack Pay in your offline fundraising Swimming My Big Walkies #50MilesForAnimals Young people Young people Subscription Renewal Buttercup Farm 30DaysForAnimals Membership Membership Membership policy statement Events Events Local events One Fun Day Christmas Concert Howloween Great British Spring Clean Businesses Businesses Become a partner Our corporate partners Other ways companies can support What we do Main menuWhat we do What we do Strategy to 2030 Strategy to 2030 Getting justice for animals Ambitions End cruelty End cruelty Investigate cruelty Rescue animals Prevent suffering Prosecution Change the law Work internationally Care for animals Care for animals Rehabilitation Release Our wildlife centres Veterinary care Home for Life Financial assistance Education Education Children in school Young offenders At home Latest Latest News Our blog Publications The Dog Rescuers Jo Brand's Kitten Rescue Media contacts Adoptober RSPCA 2022 essay collection Animal Kindness Index 2022 Wilberforce Lecture Facts, figures and myths Who we are Who we are Governance Our branches Our executives High profile supporters Our history How we work How we work Our mission Policies RSPCA's rules Shop Main menuShop Shop Pet friendly holidays Pet friendly holidays Shop and donate Shop and donate Pet insurance Pet insurance Cat insurance Dog insurance Rabbit insurance Multi-pet insurance Product information FAQs Make a claim My RSPCA Main menu My RSPCA My account My account My pets My pets Sign in Sign in Your local RSPCA Your local RSPCA Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Share this... Relevant Documents Advice for nervous dogs (164 KB) How to teach your dog to give up a toy (141 KB) How to teach your dog recall (165 KB) Understanding Dog Behaviour (PDF: 525KB) How to teach your dog basic commands (268 KB) Understand mouthing and play biting behaviour (156 KB) Find a clinical animal behaviourist If you are concerned about your pet's behaviour, contact a behaviour expert. Establishing a good relationship with you dog Find out how to establish a good relationship with your dog. Separation anxiety in dogs Telltale indicators include destructive behaviour, unwanted toileting or reports of barking. Buying a puppy Environment Diet Behaviour Aggression Separation anxiety Treatment Body language Barking Company Health and welfare Responsible dog walking Training your dog #DogKind Hidden How we help In 2022 we investigated and closed 63,563 complaints of animal cruelty Get in touch Find your local RSPCA Contact us Report cruelty Our charity Media centre Science RSPCA Assured Education Follow us Or sign up for email updates © RSPCA 2023. All rights reserved. The RSPCA helps animals in England and Wales. Registered charity no.219099. Terms and conditions Site map National privacy notice Accessibility Modern slavery Contact us Jobs 

SearchSubscribeFood + RecipesHealth + FitnessLifestyleSex + RelationshipsHomeStyleFaithNewsletterFollowShopAbout UsPromotionsWinPrivacy NoticeTerms Of UseSkip to ContentFoodHomeLifestyleRelationshipsFaithSubscribesign inEvery item on this page was chosen by a Woman's Day editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.LifestylePetsThe Meanings Behind 9 Common Dog BehaviorsThe Meanings Behind 9 Common Dog BehaviorsWhy do dogs sit, sleep, and lay on your feet? Learn the meaning behind these and other ways dogs communicate.By Alexandra Gekas and Elizabeth BerryUpdated: Sep 6, 2022Your dog probably has some pretty adorable (and equally annoying) behaviors that might seem odd to us humans. Maybe your pup is always beside you, or perhaps your dog constantly licks your face. For every seemingly strange action, there is at least one possible explanation. Woman's Day spoke with veterinarians, animal advocates, and expert columnists to help demystify these dog behaviors. So, if you have ever wondered: 'Why do dogs lay on your feet?', then this is the perfect article to read (with Fido curled up by your slippers, of course).When you adopt a dog, it's important to familiarize yourself with the breed's tendencies and behaviors so you are equipped to respond when your dog is trying to tell you something. After all, they may be laying on your feet for a totally cute and lovable reason, but they may also be trying to tell you something critical, like they are overheating or sense something bad is about to happen. You want to know the meaning behind your dog's behavior so you can adjust how you are training them if needed, or show them some extra love.Dogs are incredibly smart creatures that act with intention — even if that intention is to catch a ball. When a dog lays on your feet, he or she is trying to tell you something important. Just like he or she is trying to tell you something when chewing up your favorite chair or urinating on the rug. No one said training a pup is easy, but this expert insight can help clue you in when it comes to your dog's brain. If your dog lays at your feet, they're feeling protective.You may think your dog belongs to you, but you also belong to your dog. This means that your fur baby is going to claim you and protect you. "When he's sitting on your foot, it's an ownership thing. If his [bottom] is on you, he's marking your foot," says Jennifer Brent, animal advocate and executive director of California Wildlife Center. "It's not just that he wants to be close to you. He's saying, 'This is mine; now it smells like me, don't go near it.' He does this for three main reasons: to feel secure about his place in your life, to warn other dogs that you are spoken for, and because he wants to protect you," Brent says.To ensure your protection, dogs will also bark at guests, growl at other dogs when outside, and pull on the leash while out for a walk. "There's a line of thinking that the dog is your scout. He sees himself as a member of the pack, and he wants to make sure everything is cool before you get there," explains Brent.If your dog seems stressed, they may be mimicking your mood.Whether it was a stressful day at work or a fight with your significant other, your dog will pick up on how you feel — and feel it, too. "It goes without saying, when you're stressed, they're more stressed; when you're happier, they're happy. They match up moods with you better than a spouse or a partner," says Marty Becker, DVM, pet expert at Vetstreet. "They sit there and study you." This relationship works the other way, too: If you want to make your pooch relax, then give him a few pets. "You can, like a gas pedal, change that dynamic with your dog," Dr. Becker says. A little love goes a long way.Related Stories12 Friendliest Dog Breeds12 Loving Dogs That’ll Give You All the KissesIf your dog is destroying furniture, they could be bored.Your pup can act crazy when she's not getting enough playtime. If she's urinating on the floor, chewing the furniture, or running circles around the coffee table, your dog is probably trying to tell you she needs more activity in her life. "That's where we see a lot of behavioral issues with dogs in households," Brent says. This is particularly true for active breeds, such as herding or hunting dogs. "The Dalmatian was trained to be a hunting dog. You can't take an animal that's used to running eight miles a day, put it in an apartment, and expect it to be OK. If your dog's destroying stuff, he's saying, 'I'm bored, you need to give me something to do.'" While exercise is important — dogs should receive 45 to 60 minutes of physical exercise and 15 minutes of behavioral training per day — Dr. Becker says you can also play mental games to keep your pooch entertained. Make her play search-and-seek games for her food or even use food puzzles that she has to solve before her meal is dispensed. You can incorporate both outdoor dog toys and indoor toys and activities to keep your pup entertained all day long.Destructive behavior may also be due to separation anxiety.While most dogs are going to bark for a few minutes when you leave the house — just to let you know you're forgetting someone — some dogs have a much more serious reaction. "If you watch a video of a dog with separation anxiety, it'll tear your heart out. It's like the kid lost at the mall without his parents," Dr. Becker says. "They freak out. They think you're not coming back. They often attack the area where you leave; they'll tear up the doorframe, they're destructive. If you come home and they've had diarrhea or [are excessively] panting, their cortisol levels are high, and you have to take action." Dr. Becker recommends speaking with a dog behaviorist to receive a training program and possibly a canine antidepressant. To help assuage the trauma associated with your departure, you can try training intervals. First, put your coat on, grab your keys and go stand outside for 30 seconds. Come back in, and then go out for one minute, then five, and build from there. It's also helpful to give your dog a treat or a toy before you leave to keep him distracted.Some dogs will alert you about a health problem.It's a hard phenomenon to explain, but many dogs seem to be able to detect illness in their owners. Research shows that some dogs can actually detect a wide array of serious conditions, including seizures related to epilepsy. "We know that there's a chemical marker that a few dogs are detecting, just like they can detect bed bugs, mold, peanuts, drugs and explosives," Dr. Becker says. "They can smell the ketones on a diabetic's breath when their sugar is low. For people with epilepsy [about to have a seizure], they can alert their owner so they can get out of harm's way." Some canines are even more naturally empathetic to humans. Often, these dogs become therapy dogs, providing affection to those in need, while also sensing — and being able to react to — health problems. "Some people just need a dog to lay still with them; others need a reason to get out of the bed. It's the weirdest thing how therapy dogs know when to [move] close or far away," Dr. Becker explains. Dogs act differently when they're sick.It's important to pay attention to your pooch's behavior, because if something seems amiss, he's probably not feeling well. "You want to catch things in the earliest period to prevent unnecessary pain or worse," Dr. Becker says. "I call it 'Dog-ter Mom,' because 80% of caregivers for pets are women. You just need to pay attention to your intuition." That means noticing behavior that's out of the norm. If he's not as playful as usual, acting aggressively, having trouble getting up or isn't eating properly, then he could be sick. "You want to pay particular attention to eating habits," Dr. Becker says. "Food is their currency. If he isn't eating enough or is eating too much, if he's drinking more water or needs to eliminate more, or if you have a dog that's losing weight, then something's wrong." Your dog follows a routine.Routines help dogs anticipate how their day is going to go, such as when it's time to eat, go to the bathroom, and sleep. "Knowing what to expect is really, really important, otherwise they don't know how to react," Brent says. A general routine is best, but that doesn't mean you have to do everything at the same time each day. In fact, varying the time will actually help in the long run, Dr. Becker says. Otherwise, your dog will start running the show. "You don't want them to force how the clock works," he says. If they do, it's likely that your dog will "insist on his 5 a.m. feeding on a Sunday, when you want to sleep until 8 a.m. If you control their food, you control them — in a good way." Dogs respond to tone.Correcting your dog is important to good behavior, and how you do it is key to having them listen to you. Avoid explaining your dog's behavior to him or using a calm voice when reprimanding. Take a firm tone and be direct. "Dogs respond to tone. If you say, 'No!' while a bad action is happening, you're going to get a much better response than if you say it in a gentle voice or wait to say it afterwards," Brent says. To ensure results, it has to be said in the moment of action, and in the same way every time. "If you want to train your dog to be calm when he sees another dog, you can't wait until that dog has passed to give him a treat for being good. You can't wait until you get home," Brent says. "That says putting down the leash means a treat, instead of the action [you're trying to reinforce]."Dogs learn differently than humans.There's no doubt your dog is part of the family — but that doesn't mean he or she should be treated like a person. "Thinking your dog has the motivation of a person is the number one problem I see," says Gina Spadafori, pet-care columnist and author of Dogs for Dummies. Whether your dog urinates in the house or chews up the remote, the cause has nothing to do with revenge. "It's not an emotional or rational response. It's either a lack of training, illness, or a stress reaction that can be triggered by a change in the house," Spadafori says.So if your dog is acting out, start by trying to find the root cause. Are they sick, improperly trained, or has there been a recent change in routine? Once you identify the cause, understanding and correcting the behavior will be much easier. Elizabeth BerryUpdates EditorElizabeth Berry (she/her) is the Updates Editor at the Good Housekeeping Institute where she optimizes lifestyle content across verticals. Prior to this role, she was an Editorial Assistant for Woman’s Day where she covered everything from gift guides to recipes. She also has experience fact checking commerce articles and holds a B.A. in English and Italian Studies from Connecticut College.Bringing Your New Dog Home40 Best Gifts for Dogs30 Paw-fect Gifts for Dog Owners and Lovers25 Easy Dog Treats You Can Make at Home8 Best Cooling Dog Beds Advertisement - Continue Reading BelowThe 8 Best Dog Strollers for Your PupThe Best Dog Perfumes and Colognes100 Unique Dog Name IdeasThe Best Probiotics for Dogs With Stomach IssuesThe Best Toothpastes for Your Dog16 Dog Breeds That Stay Small24 Dog Breeds That Can Be Left Alone20 Interactive Dog Toys for Small and Large PupsAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowNewsletterAbout UsMedia KitPress RoomContact UsCommunity GuidelinesAdvertise OnlineCustomer ServiceSubscribeOther Hearst SubscriptionsGive a GiftEvents & PromotionsGiveawaysA Part of Hearst Digital MediaWe may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back.©2023 Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Privacy NoticeCA Notice at CollectionYour CA Privacy Rights/Shine the LightDAA Industry Opt OutTerms of UseSite MapCookies Choices 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Co-evolution with humans 2Intelligence 3Senses 4Communication behavior 5Social behavior Toggle Social behavior subsection 5.1Play 5.1.1Dog and dog 5.1.2Dog and human 5.2Empathy 5.3Personalities 5.4Leadership, dominance and social groups 5.5Scent 5.6Feral dogs 5.7Other behavior 6Reproduction behavior Toggle Reproduction behavior subsection 6.1Estrous cycle and mating 6.2Parenting and early life 7Behavior problems Toggle Behavior problems subsection 7.1Separation anxiety 7.2Resource guarding 7.3Jealousy 7.4Noise anxiety 7.5Tail chasing 8Behavior compared to other canids Toggle Behavior compared to other canids subsection 8.1Early aggression 8.2Tameness 8.3Social structure 8.4Socialization 8.5Cognition 8.6Reproduction 8.7Space 8.8Predation and scavenging 9Dogs in human society Toggle Dogs in human society subsection 9.1Dogs in the family 9.2Dogs at work 10Attacks 11See also 12References 13Further reading 14External links Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Dog behavior 7 languages ΕλληνικάEspañolفارسیFrançaisBahasa MelayuPortuguêsСрпски / srpski Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationGet shortened URLCite this pageWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Internally coordinated responses of dogs to internal and external stimuli A drawing by Konrad Lorenz showing facial expressions of a dog - a communication behavior. X-axis is aggression, y-axis is fear. Dog behavior is the internally coordinated responses of individuals or groups of domestic dogs to internal and external stimuli.[1] It has been shaped by millennia of contact with humans and their lifestyles. As a result of this physical and social evolution, dogs have acquired the ability to understand and communicate with humans.[2] Behavioral scientists have uncovered a wide range of social-cognitive abilities in domestic dogs. Co-evolution with humans[edit] Main article: Origin of the domestic dog The origin of the domestic dog (Canis familiaris) is not clear. Whole-genome sequencing indicates that the dog, the gray wolf and the extinct Taymyr wolf diverged around the same time 27,000–40,000 years ago.[3] How dogs became domesticated is not clear, however the two main hypotheses are self-domestication or human domestication. There exists evidence of human-canine behavioral coevolution. Intelligence[edit] Main article: Dog intelligence Dog intelligence is the ability of the dog to perceive information and retain it as knowledge in order to solve problems. Dogs have been shown to learn by inference. A study with Rico showed that he knew the labels of over 200 different items.[4] He inferred the names of novel items by exclusion learning and correctly retrieved those novel items immediately. He also retained this ability four weeks after the initial exposure. Dogs have advanced memory skills. A study documented the learning and memory capabilities of a border collie, "Chaser", who had learned the names and could associate by verbal command over 1,000 words. Dogs are able to read and react appropriately to human body language such as gesturing and pointing, and to understand human voice commands. After undergoing training to solve a simple manipulation task, dogs that are faced with an insolvable version of the same problem look at the human, while socialized wolves do not. Dogs demonstrate a theory of mind by engaging in deception.[5][6] Senses[edit] Main article: Dog anatomy § Senses The dog's senses include vision, hearing, sense of smell, taste, touch, proprioception, and sensitivity to the Earth's magnetic field. Communication behavior[edit] Main article: Dog communication Dog communication is about how dogs "speak" to each other, how they understand messages that humans send to them, and how humans can translate the ideas that dogs are trying to transmit.[7]: xii These communication behaviors include eye gaze, facial expression, vocalization, body posture (including movements of bodies and limbs) and gustatory communication (scents, pheromones and taste). Humans communicate with dogs by using vocalization, hand signals, and body posture. Dogs can also learn to understand the communication of emotions with humans by reading human facial expressions.[8] Social behavior[edit] Two studies have indicated that dog behavior vary based on their size, body weight, and skull size.[9][10] Play[edit] Dog and dog[edit] Play between dogs usually involves several behaviors often seen in aggressive encounters, such as nipping, biting and growling.[11] It is therefore important for the dogs to place these behaviors in the context of the play, rather than aggression. Dogs signal their intent to play with a range of behaviors including a "play-bow", "face-paw," "open-mouthed play face" and postures inviting the other dog to chase the initiator. Similar signals are given throughout the play to maintain the context of the potentially aggressive activities.[12] From a young age, dogs engage in play with one another. Dog play is made up primarily of mock fights. It is believed that this behavior, which is most common in puppies, is training for important behaviors later in life. Play between puppies is not necessarily a 50:50 symmetry of dominant and submissive roles between the individuals; dogs who engage in greater rates of dominant behaviors (e.g. chasing, forcing partners down) at later ages also initiate play at higher rates. This could imply that winning during play becomes more important as puppies mature.[13] Emotional contagion is linked to facial mimicry in humans and primates. Facial mimicry is an automatic response that occurs in less than 1 second in which one person involuntarily mimics another person's facial expressions, forming empathy. It has also been found in dogs at play, and play sessions lasted longer when there were facial mimicry signals from one dog to another.[14] Dog and human[edit] NASA astronaut Leland D. Melvin with his dogs Jake and Scout The motivation for a dog to play with another dog is different from that of a dog playing with a human. Dogs walked together with opportunities to play with one another and play with their owners with the same frequency as dogs being walked alone. Dogs in households with two or more dogs play more often with their owners than dogs in households with a single dog, indicating the motivation to play with other dogs does not substitute for the motivation to play with humans.[15] It is a common misconception that winning and losing games such as "tug-of-war" and "rough-and-tumble" can influence a dog's dominant relationship with humans. Rather, how dogs play indicates their temperament and relationship with their owner. Dogs that play rough-and-tumble are more amenable and show lower separation anxiety than dogs which play other types of games, and dogs playing tug-of-war and "fetch" are more confident. Dogs that start most games are less amenable and more likely to be aggressive.[16] Playing with humans can affect the cortisol levels of dogs. In one study, the cortisol responses of police dogs and border guard dogs were assessed after playing with their handlers. The cortisol concentrations of the police dogs increased, whereas the border guard dogs' hormone levels decreased. The researchers noted that during the play sessions, police officers were disciplining their dogs, whereas the border guards were truly playing with them, i.e. this included bonding and affectionate behaviors. They commented that several studies have shown that behaviors associated with control, authority or aggression increase cortisol, whereas play and affiliation behavior decrease cortisol levels.[17] Empathy[edit] In 2012, a study found that dogs oriented toward their owner or a stranger more often when the person was pretending to cry than when they were talking or humming. When the stranger pretended to cry, rather than approaching their usual source of comfort, their owner, dogs sniffed, nuzzled and licked the stranger instead. The dogs' pattern of response was behaviorally consistent with an expression of empathic concern.[18] A study found a third of dogs suffered from anxiety when separated from others.[19] Personalities[edit] The term personality has been applied to human research, whereas the term temperament has been mostly used for animal research.[20] However, both terms have been used interchangeably in the literature, or purely to distinguish humans from animals and avoid anthropomorphism.[21] Personality can be defined as "a set of behaviors that are consistent over context and time".[22] Studies of dogs' personalities have tried to identify the presence of broad personality traits that are stable and consistent over time.[21][22][23][24][25] There are different approaches to assess dog personality: Ratings of individual dogs: either a caretaker or a dog expert who is familiar with the dog is asked to answer a questionnaire, for instance the Canine Behavioral Assessment and Research Questionnaire,[26] concerning how often the dog shows certain types of behavior. Tests: the dog is submitted to a set of tests and its reactions are evaluated on a behavioral scale. For instance, the dog is presented to a familiar and then an unfamiliar person in order to measure sociability or aggression.[27] Observational test: The dog's behavior is evaluated in a selected but not controlled environment. An observer focuses on the dog's reactions to naturally occurring stimuli. For example, a walk through the supermarket can allow the observer to see the dog in various types of conditions (crowded, noisy…)[28] Several potential personality traits have been identified in dogs, for instance "Playfulness", "Curiosity/Fearlessness, "Chase-proneness", "Sociability and Aggressiveness" and "Shyness–Boldness".[29][30] A meta-analysis of 51 published peer reviewed articles identified seven dimensions of canine personality:[21] Reactivity (approach or avoidance of new objects, increased activity in novel situations) Fearfulness (shaking, avoiding novel situations) Activity Sociability (initiating friendly interactions with people and other dogs) Responsiveness to training (working with people, learning quickly) Submissiveness Aggression With regard to the nature versus nurture debate, according to a study in April 2022 carried out by Kathleen Morrill and others who work in a laboratory that was based on genetic and survey data of nearly 2000 dogs, with the majority of them having their entire genomes sequenced, as well as survey results from 16,000 owners of dogs. The dogs included mixes and purebreds, with 128 breeds represented. The study found that the physical traits of a dog can be attributed to 80% on DNA and that retrieving and friendliness around humans were predominantly genetic. But, breed alone is only responsible for about 9% of individual personality differences, with about 25% of personality traits determined by (mainly individual) genetics in total, and the rest determined by the environment.[31] However, a study in December 2022 challenged those findings after the researching of the genetic codes of 4,000 dogs and 46,000 dog owners and concluded that a dog’s breed does genetically influence a dog’s personality.[32][33] The effects of age and sex have not been clearly determined.[22] The personality models can be used for a range of tasks, including guide and working dog selection, finding appropriate families to re-home shelter dogs, or selecting breeding stock.[34][35][36] Leadership, dominance and social groups[edit] Two dogs playing follow the leader. Dominance is a descriptive term for the relationship between pairs of individuals. Among ethologists, dominance has been defined as "an attribute of the pattern of repeated, antagonistic interactions between two individuals, characterized by a consistent outcome in favor of the same dyad member and a default yielding response of its opponent rather than escalation. The status of the consistent winner is dominant and that of the loser subordinate."[37] Another definition is that a dominant animal has "priority of access to resources".[37] Dominance is a relative attribute, not absolute; there is no reason to assume that a high-ranking individual in one group would also become high ranking if moved to another. Nor is there any good evidence that "dominance" is a lifelong character trait. Competitive behavior characterized by confident (e.g. growl, inhibited bite, stand over, stare at, chase, bark at) and submissive (e.g. crouch, avoid, displacement lick/yawn, run away) patterns exchanged.[38] One test to ascertain in which group the dominant dog was used the following criteria: When a stranger comes to the house, which dog starts to bark first or if they start to bark together, which dog barks more or longer? Which dog licks more often the other dog's mouth? If the dogs get food at the same time and at the same spot, which dog starts to eat first or eats the other dog's food? If the dogs start to fight, which dog usually wins?[39] Domestic dogs appear to pay little attention to relative size, despite the large weight differences between the largest and smallest individuals; for example, size was not a predictor of the outcome of encounters between dogs meeting while being exercised by their owners nor was size correlated with neutered male dogs.[40] Therefore, many dogs do not appear to pay much attention to the actual fighting ability of their opponent, presumably allowing differences in motivation (how much the dog values the resource) and perceived motivation (what the behavior of the other dog signifies about the likelihood that it will escalate) to play a much greater role.[38] Two dogs that are contesting possession of a highly valued resource for the first time, if one is in a state of emotional arousal, in pain; if reactivity is influenced by recent endocrine changes, or motivational states such as hunger, then the outcome of the interaction may be different than if none of these factors were present. Equally, the threshold at which aggression is shown may be influenced by a range of medical factors, or, in some cases, precipitated entirely by pathological disorders. Hence, the contextual and physiological factors present when two dogs first encounter each other may profoundly influence the long-term nature of the relationship between those dogs. The complexity of the factors involved in this type of learning means that dogs may develop different "expectations" about the likely response of another individual for each resource in a range of different situations. Puppies learn early not to challenge an older dog and this respect stays with them into adulthood. When adult animals meet for the first time, they have no expectations of the behavior of the other: they will both, therefore, be initially anxious and vigilant in this encounter (characterized by the tense body posture and sudden movements typically seen when two dogs first meet), until they start to be able to predict the responses of the other individual. The outcome of these early adult–adult interactions will be influenced by the specific factors present at the time of the initial encounters. As well as contextual and physiological factors, the experiences of each member of the dyad of other dogs will also influence their behavior.[38] Scent[edit] Dogs have an olfactory sense 40 times more sensitive than a human's and they commence their lives operating almost exclusively on smell and touch.[7]: 247 The special scents that dogs use for communication are called pheromones. Different hormones are secreted when a dog is angry, fearful or confident, and some chemical signatures identify the sex and age of the dog, and if a female is in the estrus cycle, pregnant or recently given birth. Many of the pheromone chemicals can be found dissolved in a dog's urine, and sniffing where another dog has urinated gives the dog a great deal of information about that dog.[7]: 250 Male dogs prefer to mark vertical surfaces and having the scent higher allows the air to carry it farther. The height of the marking tells other dogs about the size of the dog, as among canines size is an important factor in dominance.[7]: 251 Dogs (and wolves) mark their territories with urine and their stools.[41] The anal gland of canines give a particular signature to fecal deposits and identifies the marker as well as the place where the dung is left. Dogs are very particular about these landmarks, and engage in what is to humans a meaningless and complex ritual before defecating. Most dogs start with a careful bout of sniffing of a location, perhaps to erect an exact line or boundary between their territory and another dog's territory. This behavior may also involve a small degree of elevation, such as a rock or fallen branch, to aid scent dispersal. Scratching the ground after defecating is a visual sign pointing to the scent marking. The freshness of the scent gives visitors some idea of the current status of a piece of territory and if it is used frequently. Regions under dispute, or used by different animals at different times, may lead to marking battles with every scent marked-over by a new competitor.[7]: 252–4 Further information: Dog communication Feral dogs[edit] Feral dogs are those dogs living in a wild state with no food and shelter intentionally provided by humans, and showing a continuous and strong avoidance of direct human contacts.[42] In the developing world pet dogs are uncommon, but feral, village or community dogs are plentiful around humans.[43] The distinction between feral, stray, and free-ranging dogs is sometimes a matter of degree, and a dog may shift its status throughout its life. In some unlikely but observed cases, a feral dog that was not born wild but living with a feral group can become behavior-modified to a domestic dog with an owner. A dog can become a stray when it escapes human control, by abandonment or being born to a stray mother. A stray dog can become feral when forced out of the human environment or when co-opted or socially accepted by a nearby feral group. Feralization occurs through the development of the human avoidance response.[42] Feral dogs are not reproductively self-sustaining, suffer from high rates of juvenile mortality, and depend indirectly on humans for their food, their space, and the supply of co-optable individuals.[42] See further: behavior compared to other canids. Other behavior[edit] Dogs have a general behavioral trait of strongly preferring novelty ("neophillia") compared to familiarity.[44] The average sleep time of a dog in captivity in a 24-hour period is 10.1 hours.[45] Reproduction behavior[edit] Further information: Canine reproduction Estrous cycle and mating[edit] Although puppies do not have the urge to procreate, males sometimes engage in sexual play in the form of mounting.[46] In some puppies, this behavior occurs as early as 3 or 4 weeks-of-age.[47] Dogs reach sexual maturity and can reproduce during their first year, in contrast to wolves at two years-of-age. Female dogs have their first estrus ("heat") at 6 to 12 months-of-age; smaller dogs tend to come into heat earlier whereas larger dogs take longer to mature. Female dogs have an estrous cycle that is nonseasonal and monestrus, i.e. there is only one estrus per estrous cycle. The interval between one estrus and another is, on average, seven months, however, this may range between 4 and 12 months. This interestrous period is not influenced by the photoperiod or pregnancy. The average duration of estrus is 9 days with spontaneous ovulation usually about 3 days after the onset of estrus.[48] For several days before estrus, a phase called proestrus, the female dog may show greater interest in male dogs and "flirt" with them (proceptive behavior). There is progressive vulval swelling and some bleeding. If males try to mount a female dog during proestrus, she may avoid mating by sitting down or turning round and growling or snapping. Estrous behavior in the female dog is usually indicated by her standing still with the tail held up, or to the side of the perineum, when the male sniffs the vulva and attempts to mount. This tail position is sometimes called "flagging". The female dog may also turn, presenting the vulva to the male.[48] The male dog mounts the female and is able to achieve intromission with a non-erect penis, which contains a bone called the os penis. The dog's penis enlarges inside the vagina, thereby preventing its withdrawal; this is sometimes known as the "tie" or "copulatory lock". The male dog rapidly thrust into the female for 1–2 minutes then dismounts with the erect penis still inside the vagina, and turns to stand rear-end to rear-end with the female dog for up to 30 to 40 minutes; the penis is twisted 180 degrees in a lateral plane. During this time, prostatic fluid is ejaculated.[48] The female dog can bear another litter within 8 months of the previous one. Dogs are polygamous in contrast to wolves that are generally monogamous. Therefore, dogs have no pair bonding and the protection of a single mate, but rather have multiple mates in a year. The consequence is that wolves put a lot of energy into producing a few pups in contrast to dogs that maximize the production of pups. This higher pup production rate enables dogs to maintain or even increase their population with a lower pup survival rate than wolves, and allows dogs a greater capacity than wolves to grow their population after a population crash or when entering a new habitat. It is proposed that these differences are an alternative breeding strategy, one adapted to a life of scavenging instead of hunting.[49] Parenting and early life[edit] All of the wild members of the genus Canis display complex coordinated parental behaviors. Wolf pups are cared for primarily by their mother for the first 3 months of their life when she remains in the den with them while they rely on her milk for sustenance and her presence for protection. The father brings her food. Once they leave the den and can chew, the parents and pups from previous years regurgitate food for them. Wolf pups become independent by 5 to 8 months, although they often stay with their parents for years. In contrast, dog pups are cared for by the mother and rely on her for milk and protection but she gets no help from the father nor other dogs. Once pups are weaned around 10 weeks they are independent and receive no further maternal care.[49] Behavior problems[edit] There are many different types of behavioural issues that a dog can exhibit, including growling, snapping, barking, and invading a human's personal space. A survey of 203 dog owners in Melbourne, Australia, found that the main behaviour problems reported by owners were overexcitement (63%) and jumping up on people (56%).[50] Some problems are related to attachment while others are neurological, as seen below. Separation anxiety[edit] When dogs are separated from humans, usually the owner, they often display behaviors which can be broken into the following four categories: exploratory behaviour, object play, destructive behaviour, and vocalization, and they are related to the canine's level of arousal.[51] These behaviours may manifest as destructiveness, fecal or urinary elimination, hypersalivation or vocalization among other things. Dogs from single-owner homes are approximately 2.5 times more likely to have separation anxiety compared to dogs from multiple-owner homes. Furthermore, sexually intact dogs are only one third as likely to have separation anxiety as neutered dogs. The sex of dogs and whether there is another pet in the home do not have an effect on separation anxiety.[52] It has been estimated that at least 14% of dogs examined at typical veterinary practices in the United States have shown signs of separation anxiety. Dogs that have been diagnosed with profound separation anxiety can be left alone for no more than minutes before they begin to panic and exhibit the behaviors associated with separation anxiety. Separation problems have been found to be linked to the dog's dependency on its owner, not because of disobedience.[51] In the absence of treatment, affected dogs are often relinquished to a humane society or shelter, abandoned, or euthanized.[53] Resource guarding[edit] Resource guarding is exhibited by many canines, and is one of the most commonly reported behaviour issues to canine professionals.[54] It is seen when a dog uses specific behaviour patterns so that they can control access to an item, and the patterns are flexible when people are around.[55] If a canine places value on some resource (i.e. food, toys, etc.) they may attempt to guard it from other animals as well as people, which leads to behavioural problems if not treated. The guarding can show in many different ways from rapid ingestion of food to using the body to shield items. It manifests as aggressive behaviour including, but not limited to, growling, barking, or snapping. Some dogs will also resource guard their owners and can become aggressive if the behaviour is allowed to continue. Owners must learn to interpret their dog's body language in order to try to judge the dog's reaction, as visual signals are used (i.e. changes in body posture, facial expression, etc.) to communicate feeling and response.[54] These behaviours are commonly seen in shelter animals, most likely due to insecurities caused by a poor environment. Resource guarding is a concern since it can lead to aggression, but research has found that aggression over guarding can be contained by teaching the dog to drop the item they are guarding.[55] Jealousy[edit] Canines are one of a number of non-human animals that can express jealousy towards other animals or animal-like objects.[56] This emotion may feed into other behavioural problems, manifest as attention-seeking behaviour, withdrawing from social activity, or aggression towards their owner or another animal or person. Noise anxiety[edit] Canines often fear, and exhibit stress responses to, loud noises. Noise-related anxieties in dogs may be triggered by fireworks, thunderstorms, gunshots, and even loud or sharp bird noises. Associated stimuli may also come to trigger the symptoms of the phobia or anxiety, such as a change in barometric pressure being associated with a thunderstorm, thus causing an anticipatory anxiety. Tail chasing[edit] Tail chasing can be classified as a stereotypy. It falls under obsessive compulsive disorder, which is a neuropsychiatric disorder that can present in dogs as canine compulsive disorder.[57] In one clinical study on this potential behavioral problem, 18 tail-chasing terriers were given clomipramine orally at a dosage of 1 to 2 mg/kg (0.5 to 0.9 mg/lb) of body weight, every 12 hours. Three of the dogs required treatment at a slightly higher dosage range to control tail chasing, however, after 1 to 12 weeks of treatment, 9 of 12 dogs were reported to have a 75% or greater reduction in tail chasing.[58] Personality can also play a factor in tail chasing. Dogs who chase their tails have been found to be more shy than those who do not, and some dogs also show a lower level of response during tail chasing bouts.[57] Behavior compared to other canids[edit] Comparisons made within the wolf-like canids allow the identification of those behaviors that may have been inherited from common ancestry and those that may have been the result of domestication or other relatively recent environmental changes.[42] Studies of free-ranging African Basenjis and New Guinea Singing Dogs indicate that their behavioral and ecological traits were the result of environmental selection pressures or selective breeding choices and not the result of artificial selection imposed by humans.[59] Early aggression[edit] Dog pups show unrestrained fighting with their siblings from 2 weeks of age, with injury avoided only due to their undeveloped jaw muscles. This fighting gives way to play-chasing with the development of running skills at 4–5 weeks. Wolf pups possess more-developed jaw muscles from 2 weeks of age, when they first show signs of play-fighting with their siblings. Serious fighting occurs during 4–6 weeks of age.[60] Compared to wolf and dog pups, golden jackal pups develop aggression at the age of 4–6 weeks when play-fighting frequently escalates into uninhibited biting intended to harm. This aggression ceases by 10–12 weeks when a hierarchy has formed.[61] Tameness[edit] Unlike other domestic species which were primarily selected for production-related traits, dogs were initially selected for their behaviors.[62][63] In 2016, a study found that there were only 11 fixed genes that showed variation between wolves and dogs. These gene variations were unlikely to have been the result of natural evolution, and indicate selection on both morphology and behavior during dog domestication. These genes have been shown to affect the catecholamine synthesis pathway, with the majority of the genes affecting the fight-or-flight response[63][64] (i.e. selection for tameness), and emotional processing.[63] Dogs generally show reduced fear and aggression compared to wolves.[63][65] Some of these genes have been associated with aggression in some dog breeds, indicating their importance in both the initial domestication and then later in breed formation.[63] Social structure[edit] Among canids, packs are the social units that hunt, rear young and protect a communal territory as a stable group and their members are usually related.[66] Members of the feral dog group are usually not related. Feral dog groups are composed of a stable 2–6 members compared to the 2–15 member wolf pack whose size fluctuates with the availability of prey and reaches a maximum in winter time. The feral dog group consists of monogamous breeding pairs compared to the one breeding pair of the wolf pack. Agonistic behavior does not extend to the individual level and does not support a higher social structure compared to the ritualized agonistic behavior of the wolf pack that upholds its social structure. Feral pups have a very high mortality rate that adds little to the group size, with studies showing that adults are usually killed through accidents with humans, therefore other dogs need to be co-opted from villages to maintain stable group size.[42] Socialization[edit] The critical period for socialization begins with walking and exploring the environment. Dog and wolf pups both develop the ability to see, hear and smell at 4 weeks of age. Dogs begin to explore the world around them at 4 weeks of age with these senses available to them, while wolves begin to explore at 2 weeks of age when they have the sense of smell but are functionally blind and deaf. The consequences of this is that more things are novel and frightening to wolf pups. The critical period for socialization closes with the avoidance of novelty, when the animal runs away from – rather than approaching and exploring – novel objects. For dogs this develops between 4 and 8 weeks of age. Wolves reach the end of the critical period after 6 weeks, after which it is not possible to socialize a wolf.[49] Dog puppies require as little as 90 minutes of contact with humans during their critical period of socialization to form a social attachment. This will not create a highly social pet but a dog that will solicit human attention.[67] Wolves require 24 hours contact a day starting before 3 weeks of age. To create a socialized wolf the pups are removed from the den at 10 days of age, kept in constant human contact until they are 4 weeks old when they begin to bite their sleeping human companions, then spend only their waking hours in the presence of humans. This socialization process continues until age 4 months, when the pups can join other captive wolves but will require daily human contact to remain socialized. Despite this intensive socialization process, a well-socialized wolf will behave differently to a well-socialized dog and will display species-typical hunting and reproductive behaviors, only closer to humans than a wild wolf. These wolves do not generalize their socialization to all humans in the same manner as a socialized dog and they remain more fearful of novelty compared to socialized dogs.[68] In 1982, a study to observe the differences between dogs and wolves raised in similar conditions took place. The dog puppies preferred larger amounts of sleep at the beginning of their lives, while the wolf puppies were much more active. The dog puppies also preferred the company of humans, rather than their canine foster mother, though the wolf puppies were the exact opposite, spending more time with their foster mother. The dogs also showed a greater interest in the food given to them and paid little attention to their surroundings, while the wolf puppies found their surroundings to be much more intriguing than their food or food bowl. The wolf puppies were observed taking part in antagonistic play at a younger age, while the dog puppies did not display dominant/submissive roles until they were much older. The wolf puppies were rarely seen as being aggressive to each other or towards the other canines. On the other hand, the dog puppies were much more aggressive to each other and other canines, often seen full-on attacking their foster mother or one another.[69] A 2005 study comparing dog and wolf pups concluded that extensively socialised dogs as well as unsocialised dog pups showed greater attachment to a human owner than wolf pups did, even if the wolf was socialised. The study concluded that dogs may have evolved a capacity for attachment to humans functionally analogous to that human infants display.[70] Cognition[edit] Despite claims that dogs show more human-like social cognition than wolves,[71][72][73] several recent studies have demonstrated that if wolves are properly socialized to humans and have the opportunity to interact with humans regularly, then they too can succeed on some human-guided cognitive tasks,[74][75][76][77][78] in some cases out-performing dogs at an individual level.[79] Similar to dogs, wolves can also follow more complex point types made with body parts other than the human arm and hand (e.g. elbow, knee, foot).[78] Both dogs and wolves have the cognitive capacity for prosocial behavior toward humans; however it is not guaranteed. For canids to perform well on traditional human-guided tasks (e.g. following the human point) both relevant lifetime experiences with humans – including socialization to humans during the critical period for social development – and opportunities to associate human body parts with certain outcomes (such as food being provided by human hands, a human throwing or kicking a ball, etc.) are required.[80] After undergoing training to solve a simple manipulation task, dogs that are faced with an insoluble version of the same problem look at the human, while socialized wolves do not.[73] Reproduction[edit] Dogs reach sexual maturity and can reproduce during their first year in contrast to a wolf at two years. The female dog can bear another litter within 8 months of the last one. The canid genus is influenced by the photoperiod and generally reproduces in the springtime.[42] Domestic dogs are not reliant on seasonality for reproduction in contrast to the wolf, coyote, Australian dingo and African basenji that may have only one, seasonal, estrus each year.[48] Feral dogs are influenced by the photoperiod with around half of the breeding females mating in the springtime, which is thought to indicate an ancestral reproductive trait not overcome by domestication,[42] as can be inferred from wolves[81] and Cape hunting dogs.[82] Domestic dogs are polygamous in contrast to wolves that are generally monogamous. Therefore, domestic dogs have no pair bonding and the protection of a single mate, but rather have multiple mates in a year. There is no paternal care in dogs as opposed to wolves where all pack members assist the mother with the pups. The consequence is that wolves put a lot of energy into producing a few pups in contrast to dogs that maximize the production of pups. This higher pup production rate enables dogs to maintain or even increase their population with a lower pup survival rate than wolves, and allows dogs a greater capacity than wolves to grow their population after a population crash or when entering a new habitat. It is proposed that these differences are an alternative breeding strategy adapted to a life of scavenging instead of hunting.[49] In contrast to domestic dogs, feral dogs are monogamous. Domestic dogs tend to have a litter size of 10, wolves 3, and feral dogs 5–8. Feral pups have a very high mortality rate with only 5% surviving at the age of one year, and sometimes the pups are left unattended making them vulnerable to predators.[42] Domestic dogs stand alone among all canids for a total lack of paternal care.[83] Dogs differ from wolves and most other large canid species as they generally do not regurgitate food for their young, nor the young of other dogs in the same territory.[84] However, this difference was not observed in all domestic dogs. Regurgitating of food by the females for the young, as well as care for the young by the males, has been observed in domestic dogs, dingos and in feral or semi-feral dogs. In one study of a group of free-ranging dogs, for the first 2 weeks immediately after parturition the lactating females were observed to be more aggressive to protect the pups. The male parents were in contact with the litters as 'guard' dogs for the first 6–8 weeks of the litters' life. In absence of the mothers, they were observed to prevent the approach of strangers by vocalizations or even by physical attacks. Moreover, one male fed the litter by regurgitation showing the existence of paternal care in some free-roaming dogs.[85] Space[edit] Space used by feral dogs is not dissimilar from most other canids in that they use defined traditional areas (home ranges) that tend to be defended against intruders, and have core areas where most of their activities are undertaken. Urban domestic dogs have a home range of 2-61 hectares, in contrast to a feral dog's home range of 58 square kilometers. Wolf home ranges vary from 78 square kilometers where prey is deer, to 2.5 square kilometers at higher latitudes where prey is moose and caribou. Wolves will defend their territory based on prey abundance and pack density, but feral dogs will defend their home ranges all year. Where wolf ranges and feral dog ranges overlap, the feral dogs will site their core areas closer to human settlement.[42] Predation and scavenging[edit] Despite claims in the popular press, studies could not find evidence of a single predation on cattle by feral dogs.[42][86][87] However, domestic dogs were responsible for the death of 3 calves over one 5-year study.[87] Other studies in Europe and North America indicate moderate limited success in the consumption of wild boar, deer and other ungulates, however it could not be determined if this was predation or scavenging on carcasses. A new study has shown though that these were most likely due to predation.[88] Feral dogs, like their ancestors do participate in pup rearing. Several studies show that feral dogs are not primarily scavengers, despite claims in the popular press. Studies in the modern era show that their diet is very opportunistic, ranging from garbage, carrion to live prey. The primary feature that distinguishes feral from domestic dogs is the degree of reliance or dependence on humans, and in some respect, their behavior toward people. Feral dogs survive and reproduce independently of human intervention or assistance. While it is true that some feral dogs use human garbage for food, others acquire their primary subsistence by hunting and scavenging like other wild canids.[89] Dogs may resort to hunting more than garbage consuming when their garbage food source is scarce. Even well-fed domestic dogs are prone to scavenge; gastro-intestinal veterinary visits increase during warmer weather as dogs are prone to eat decaying material.[90] Some dogs consume feces, which may contain nutrition.[91][92] On occasion well-fed dogs have been known to scavenge their owners' corpses.[93] Dogs in human society[edit] Further information: Human-canine bond Studies using an operant framework have indicated that humans can influence the behavior of dogs through food, petting and voice. Food and 20–30 seconds of petting maintained operant responding in dogs.[94] Some dogs will show a preference for petting once food is readily available, and dogs will remain in proximity to a person providing petting and show no satiation to that stimulus.[95] Petting alone was sufficient to maintain the operant response of military dogs to voice commands, and responses to basic obedience commands in all dogs increased when only vocal praise was provided for correct responses.[96] A study using dogs that were trained to remain motionless while unsedated and unrestrained in an MRI scanner exhibited caudate activation to a hand signal associated with reward.[2] Further work found that the magnitude of the canine caudate response is similar to that of humans, while the between-subject variability in dogs may be less than humans.[97] In a further study, 5 scents were presented (self, familiar human, strange human, familiar dog, strange dog). While the olfactory bulb/peduncle was activated to a similar degree by all the scents, the caudate was activated maximally to the familiar human. Importantly, the scent of the familiar human was not the handler, meaning that the caudate response differentiated the scent in the absence of the person being present. The caudate activation suggested that not only did the dogs discriminate that scent from the others, they had a positive association with it. Although these signals came from two different people, the humans lived in the same household as the dog and therefore represented the dog's primary social circle. And while dogs should be highly tuned to the smell of items that are not comparable, it seems that the "reward response" is reserved for their humans.[98] Research has shown that there are individual differences in the interactions between dogs and their human that have significant effects on dog behavior. In 1997, a study showed that the type of relationship between dog and master, characterized as either companionship or working relationship, significantly affected the dog's performance on a cognitive problem-solving task. They speculate that companion dogs have a more dependent relationship with their owners, and look to them to solve problems. In contrast, working dogs are more independent.[99] Dogs in the family[edit] In 2013, a study produced the first evidence under controlled experimental observation for a correlation between the owner's personality and their dog's behaviour.[100] Further information: Companion dog Dogs at work[edit] Service dogs are those that are trained to help people with disabilities such as blindness, epilepsy, diabetes and autism. Detection dogs are trained to using their sense of smell to detect substances such as explosives, illegal drugs, wildlife scat, or blood. In science, dogs have helped humans understand about the conditioned reflex. Attack dogs, dogs that have been trained to attack on command, are employed in security, police, and military roles. Service dog programs have been established to help individuals suffering from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and have shown to have positive results.[101] Attacks[edit] Main article: Dog attack A dog's teeth can inflict serious injuries The human-dog relationship is based on unconditional trust; however, if this trust is lost it will be difficult to reinstate.[citation needed] In the UK between 2005 and 2013, there were 17 fatal dog attacks. In 2007–08, there were 4,611 hospital admissions due to dog attacks, which increased to 5,221 in 2008–09. It was estimated in 2013 that more than 200,000 people a year are bitten by dogs in England, with the annual cost to the National Health Service of treating injuries about £3 million.[102] A report published in 2014 stated there were 6,743 hospital admissions specifically caused by dog bites, a 5.8% increase from the 6,372 admissions in the previous 12 months.[103][needs update] In the US between 1979 and 1996, there were more than 300 human dog bite-related fatalities.[104] In the US in 2013, there were 31 dog-bite related deaths. Each year, more than 4.5 million people in the US are bitten by dogs and almost 1 in 5 require medical attention. A dog's thick fur protects it from the bite of another dog, but humans are furless and are not so protected.[105] Attack training is condemned by some as promoting ferocity in dogs; a 1975 American study showed that 10% of dogs that have bitten a person received attack dog training at some point.[106] See also[edit] Gray wolf § Behavior Alpha roll Dog communication Dog intelligence Calming signals Pack (canine) Pack hunter Separation anxiety disorder (humans) Temperament test References[edit] ^ Levitis, Daniel; William Z. Lidicker Jr, Glenn Freund; Freund, Glenn (June 2009). "Behavioural biologists do not agree on what constitutes behaviour" (PDF). Animal Behaviour. 78 (1): 103–10. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2009.03.018. PMC 2760923. PMID 20160973. ^ a b Berns, G. S.; Brooks, A. M.; Spivak, M. (2012). Neuhauss, Stephan C. F (ed.). "Functional MRI in Awake Unrestrained Dogs". PLOS ONE. 7 (5): e38027. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...738027B. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038027. PMC 3350478. PMID 22606363. ^ Skoglund, P.; Ersmark, E.; Palkopoulou, E.; Dalén, L. (2015). "Ancient Wolf Genome Reveals an Early Divergence of Domestic Dog Ancestors and Admixture into High-Latitude Breeds". Current Biology. 25 (11): 1515–9. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.04.019. PMID 26004765. ^ "The New Science Of Understanding Dog Behavior". NPR.org. Retrieved 2022-05-28. ^ Maginnity, M.E. & Grace, R.C. (2014). "Visual perspective taking by dogs (Canis familiaris) in a Guesser–Knower task: evidence for a canine theory of mind?". Animal Cognition. 17 (6): 1375–1392. doi:10.1007/s10071-014-0773-9. PMID 24950722. S2CID 14833483. ^ Kaminski, J.; Bräuer, J.; Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (2009). "Domestic dogs are sensitive to a human's perspective" (PDF). Behaviour. 146 (7): 979–998. doi:10.1163/156853908X395530. ^ a b c d e Coren, Stanley "How To Speak Dog: Mastering the Art of Dog-Human Communication" 2000 Simon & Schuster, New York. ^ Huber, Ludwig (October 2016). "How Dogs Perceive and Understand Us". Current Directions in Psychological Science. 25 (5): 339–344. doi:10.1177/0963721416656329. ISSN 0963-7214. S2CID 151488382. ^ McGreevy, Paul D.; Georgevsky, Dana; Carrasco, Johanna; Valenzuela, Michael; Duffy, Deborah L.; Serpell, James A. (2013). "Dog Behavior Co-Varies with Height, Bodyweight and Skull Shape". PLOS ONE. 8 (12): e80529. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...880529M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0080529. PMC 3864788. PMID 24358107. ^ Stone, Holly R.; McGreevy, Paul D.; Starling, Melissa J.; Forkman, Bjorn (2016). "Associations between Domestic-Dog Morphology and Behaviour Scores in the Dog Mentality Assessment". PLOS ONE. 11 (2): e0149403. Bibcode:2016PLoSO..1149403S. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0149403. PMC 4771026. PMID 26919495. ^ Kujala, Miiamaaria (January 23, 2017). "Human Empathy, Personality and Experience Affect the Emotion Ratings of Dog and Human Facial Expressions". PLOS ONE. 12 (1): e0170730. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1270730K. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0170730. PMC 5257001. PMID 28114335. S2CID 1215168. ^ Horowitz, A. (2009). "Attention to attention in domestic dog Canis familiaris dyadic play". Animal Cognition. 12 (1): 107–118. doi:10.1007/s10071-008-0175-y. PMID 18679727. S2CID 207050813. ^ Ward, C.; Bauer, E.B.; Smuts, B.B. (2008). "Partner preferences and asymmetries in social play among domestic dog, Canis lupus familiaris, littermates" (PDF). Animal Behaviour. 76 (4): 1187–1199. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2008.06.004. S2CID 1295114. ^ Palagi, Elisabetta; Nicotra, Velia; Cordoni, Giada (2015). "Rapid mimicry and emotional contagion in domestic dogs". Royal Society Open Science. 2 (12): 150505. Bibcode:2015RSOS....250505P. doi:10.1098/rsos.150505. PMC 4807458. PMID 27019737. ^ Rooney, N.J.; Bradshaw, J.W.S.; Robinson, I.H. (2000). "A comparison of dog–dog and dog-human play behaviour". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 66 (3): 235–248. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(99)00078-7. ^ Rooney, N.J.; Bradshaw, Jv.W.S. (2003). "Links between play and dominance and attachment dimensions of dog-human relationships". Journal of Applied Animal Welfare Science. 6 (2): 67–94. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.495.1702. doi:10.1207/S15327604JAWS0602_01. PMID 12909524. S2CID 2254971. ^ Horváth, Z.; Dóka, A.; Miklósi A. (2008). "Affiliative and disciplinary behavior of human handlers during play with their dog affects cortisol concentrations in opposite directions". Hormones and Behavior. 54 (1): 107–114. doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2008.02.002. PMID 18353328. S2CID 16805722. ^ Custance, Deborah; Mayer, Jennifer (2012). "Empathic-like responding by domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) to distress in humans: an exploratory study". Animal Cognition. 15 (5): 851–859. doi:10.1007/s10071-012-0510-1. PMID 22644113. S2CID 15153091. ^ "Behaviour problems linked to pessimistic dogs". Sydney Morning Herald. October 12, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010. ^ McCrae, R. R.; Costa, P.T; Ostendorf, F.; Angleitner, A.; Hřebíčková, M.; Avia, M. D.; Saunders, P.R. (2000). "Nature over nurture: temperament, personality, and life span development". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 78 (1): 173–86. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.1.173. PMID 10653513. ^ a b c Jones, A. C.; Gosling, S. D. (2005). "Temperament and personality in dogs (Canis familiaris): a review and evaluation of past research". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 95 (1): 1–53. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2005.04.008. ^ a b c Gartner, M. C. (2015). "Pet personality: A review". Personality and Individual Differences. 75: 102–113. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2014.10.042. ^ Fratkin, J. L.; Sinn, D. L.; Patal, E. A.; Gosling, S. D. (2013). "Personality consistency in dogs: a meta-analysis". PLOS ONE. 8 (1): e54907. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...854907F. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0054907. PMC 3553070. PMID 23372787. ^ Vas, J.; Müller, C.; Győri, B.; Miklósi, Á. (2008). "Consistency of dogs' reactions to threatening cues of an unfamiliar person". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 112 (3): 331–344. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2007.09.002. ^ Meegahapola, L.; Constantinides, M.; Radivojevic, Z.; Li, H.; Quercia, D.; Eggleston, M. S. (2023). "Quantified Canine: Inferring Dog Personality from Wearables". Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 1–19. arXiv:2301.06964. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581088. ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5. S2CID 255942162. ^ Hu, Y.; Serpell, J. A. (2003). "Development and validation of a questionnaire for measuring behavior and temperament traits in pet dogs". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 223 (9): 1293–1300. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.223.1293. PMID 14621216. S2CID 9771544. ^ De Meester, R. H.; De Bacquer, D.; Peremans, K.; Vermeire, S.; Planta, D. J.; Coopman, F.; Audenaert, K. (2008). "A preliminary study on the use of the Socially Acceptable Behavior test as a test for shyness/confidence in the temperament of dogs". Journal of Veterinary Behavior: Clinical Applications and Research. 3 (4): 161–170. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2007.10.005. ^ Barnard, S.; Siracusa, C.; Reisner, I.; Valsecchi, P.; Serpell, J. A. (2012). "Validity of model devices used to assess canine temperament in behavioral tests". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 138 (1): 79–87. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2012.02.017. ^ Svartberga, K.; Forkman, B. (2002). "Personality traits in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris)" (PDF). Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 79 (2): 133–155. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(02)00121-1. ^ Svartberg, K; Tapper, I; Temrin, H; Radesater, T; Thorman, S (February 2005). "Consistency of personality traits in dogs". Animal Behaviour. 69 (2): 283–291. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2004.04.011. S2CID 53154729. ^ David Grimm (28 Apr 2022). "Your dog's breed doesn't determine its personality, study suggests". American Association for the Advancement of Science. ^ Emily V. Dutrow; James A. Serpell; Elaine A. Ostrander (8 December 2022). "Domestic dog lineages reveal genetic drivers of behavioral diversification". Cell. ^ Melissa Starlibg (11 December 2022). "Genetic research confirms your dog's breed influences its personality — but so do you". The Conversation. ^ Duffy, D. L.; Serpell, J. A. (2008). "Behavioral assessment of guide and service dogs". Journal of Veterinary Behavior: Clinical Applications and Research. 3 (4): 186–188. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2007.12.010. ^ Bollen, K. S.; Horowitz, J. (2008). "Behavioral evaluation and demographic information in the assessment of aggressiveness in shelter dogs". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 112 (1): 120–135. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2007.07.007. ^ Riemer, S.; Müller, C.; Virányi, Z.; Huber, L.; Range, F. (2013). "Choice of conflict resolution strategy is linked to sociability in dog puppies". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 149 (1): 36–44. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2013.09.006. PMC 4044588. PMID 24910487. ^ a b Drews, Carlos (1993). "The Concept and Definition of Dominance in Animal Behaviour". Behaviour. 125 (3): 283–313. doi:10.1163/156853993X00290. ^ a b c Bradshaw, John W.S.; Blackwell, Emily J.; Casey, Rachel A. (2009). "Dominance in domestic dogs—useful construct or bad habit?" (PDF). Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 4 (3): 135–144. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2008.08.004. ^ Pongrácz, P.; et al. (2008). "How does dominance rank status affect individual and social learning performance in the dog (Canis familiaris)?". Animal Cognition. 11 (1): 75–82. doi:10.1007/s10071-007-0090-7. ISSN 1435-9456. PMID 17492317. S2CID 8930934. ^ Bradshaw, John W.S.; Lea, Amanda M. (1992). "Dyadic Interactions Between Domestic Dogs". Anthrozoös. 5 (4): 245–253. doi:10.2752/089279392787011287. ^ L. David Mech; Luigi Boitani (1 October 2010). Wolves: Behavior, Ecology, and Conservation. University of Chicago Press. pp. 84–. ISBN 978-0-226-51698-1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Boitani, L.; Ciucci, P. (1995). "Comparative social ecology of feral dogs and wolves" (PDF). Ethology Ecology & Evolution. 7 (1): 49–72. doi:10.1080/08927014.1995.9522969. ^ Coppinger, Ray (2001). Dogs: a Startling New Understanding of Canine Origin, Behavior and Evolution. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-85530-1. ^ Kaulfuß, P.; Mills, D.S. (2008). "Neophilia in domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and its implication for studies of dog cognition". Animal Cognition. 11 (3): 553–556. doi:10.1007/s10071-007-0128-x. PMID 18183436. S2CID 31406623. ^ "40 Winks?" Jennifer S. Holland, National Geographic Vol. 220, No. 1. July 2011. ^ Bonnie V. G. Beaver (2009). Canine Behavior: Insights and Answers. Elsevier Health Sciences. ISBN 978-1-4160-5419-1. ^ Edward C. Feldman; Richard William Nelson (2004). Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. Elsevier Health Sciences. ISBN 978-0-7216-9315-6. ^ a b c d "Canine and feline reproduction and contraception". Michelson Prize and Grants. Archived from the original on August 16, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. ^ a b c d Lord, K. (2013). "A Comparison of the Sensory Development of Wolves (Canis lupus lupus) and Dogs (Canis lupus familiaris)". Ethology. 119 (2): 110–120. doi:10.1111/eth.12044. ^ Kobelt, A.J.; Hemsworth, P.H.; Barnett, J.L.; Coleman, G.J. (2003). "A survey of dog ownership in suburban Australia—conditions and behaviour problems". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 82 (2): 137–148. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(03)00062-5. ^ a b Lund, Jørgen Damkjer; Jørgensen, Mads Chr (1999). "Behaviour patterns and time course of activity in dogs with separation problems". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 63 (3): 219–236. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(99)00011-8. ^ Flannigan, G.; Dodman, N.H.A (2001). "Risk factors and behaviors associated with separation anxiety in dogs". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 219 (4): 460–466. doi:10.2460/javma.2001.219.460. PMID 11518171. ^ Karen L. Overall; Arthur E. Dunham; Diane Frank (August 2001). "Frequency of nonspecific clinical signs in dogs with separation anxiety, thunderstorm phobia, and noise phobia, alone or in combination". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 219 (4): 467–473. doi:10.2460/javma.2001.219.467. PMID 11518172 – via AVMA. ^ a b Jacobs, Jacquelyn A.; Pearl, David L.; Coe, Jason B.; Widowski, Tina M.; Niel, Lee (2017). "Ability of owners to identify resource guarding behaviour in the domestic dog". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 188: 77–83. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2016.12.012. ^ a b Jacobs, Jacquelyn A.; Coe, Jason B.; Pearl, David L.; Widowski, Tina M.; Niel, Lee (2017). "Factors associated with canine resource guarding behaviour in the presence of people: A cross-sectional survey of dog owners". Preventive Veterinary Medicine. 161: 143–153. doi:10.1016/j.prevetmed.2017.02.005. PMID 28268035. S2CID 207419404. ^ Harris, Christine R.; Prouvost, Caroline (2014-07-23). "Jealousy in Dogs". PLOS ONE. 9 (7): e94597. Bibcode:2014PLoSO...994597H. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0094597. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 4108309. PMID 25054800. ^ a b Tiira, Katriina; Hakosalo, Osmo; Kareinen, Lauri; Thomas, Anne; Hielm-Bjorkman, Anna; Escriou, Catherine; Arnold, Paul; Lohi, Hannes (2012). "Environmental effects on compulsive tail chasing in dogs". PLOS ONE. 7 (7): e41684. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...741684T. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0041684. PMC 3406045. PMID 22844513. ^ Moon-Fanelli, A.A.; Dodman, N.H. (1998). "Description and development of compulsive tail chasing in terriers and response to clomipramine treatment". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 212 (8): 1252–1257. PMID 9569164. ^ Brisbin, L; Risch, TS (1997). "Primitive dogs, their ecology and behavior: Unique opportunities to study the early development of the human-canine bond". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 210 (8): 1122–1126. PMID 9108912. ^ Frank, Harry; Frank, Martha Gialdini (1982). "On the effects of domestication on canine social development and behavior". Applied Animal Ethology. 8 (6): 507. doi:10.1016/0304-3762(82)90215-2. hdl:2027.42/23918. ^ Feddersen-Petersen, D. (1991). "The ontogeny of social play and agonistic behaviour in selected canid species" (PDF). Bonn. Zool. Beitr. 42: 97–114. ^ Serpell J, Duffy D. Dog Breeds and Their Behavior. In: Domestic Dog Cognition and Behavior. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2014 ^ a b c d e Cagan, Alex; Blass, Torsten (2016). "Identification of genomic variants putatively targeted by selection during dog domestication". BMC Evolutionary Biology. 16: 10. doi:10.1186/s12862-015-0579-7. PMC 4710014. PMID 26754411. ^ Almada RC, Coimbra NC. Recruitment of striatonigral disinhibitory and nigrotectal inhibitory GABAergic pathways during the organization of defensive behavior by mice in a dangerous environment with the venomous snake Bothrops alternatus [ Reptilia , Viperidae ] Synapse 2015:n/a–n/a ^ Coppinger R, Schneider R: Evolution of working dogs. The domestic dog: Its evolution, behaviour and interactions with people. Cambridge: Cambridge University press, 1995. ^ Mech, L. D. 1970. The Wolf: The Ecology and Behavior of an Endangered Species. Natural History Press (Doubleday Publishing Co., N.Y.) 389 pp. (Reprinted in paperback by University of Minnesota Press, May 1981) ^ Freedman, Daniel G.; King, John A.; Elliot, Orville (March 1961). "Critical Period in the Social Development of Dogs". Science. 133 (3457): 1016–1017. Bibcode:1961Sci...133.1016F. doi:10.1126/science.133.3457.1016. PMID 13701603. S2CID 278125. ^ Klinghammer, E. & Goodmann, P. A. (1987). "Socialization and management of wolves in captivity". In H. Frank (ed.). Man and wolf: Advances, issues, and problems in captive wolf research. Dordrecht: W. Junk. ^ Frank H; Frank MG (1982). "On the effects of domestication on canine social development and behavior" (PDF). Applied Animal Ethology. 8 (6): 507–525. doi:10.1016/0304-3762(82)90215-2. hdl:2027.42/23918. ^ Topál, József, Márta Gácsi, Ádám Miklósi, Zsófia Virányi, Enikő Kubinyi, and Vilmos Csányi. "Attachment to humans: a comparative study on hand-reared wolves and differently socialized dog puppies." Animal behaviour 70, no. 6 (2005): 1367-1375. ^ Hare, B. (2002). "The Domestication of Social Cognition in Dogs" (PDF). Science. 298 (5598): 1634–6. Bibcode:2002Sci...298.1634H. doi:10.1126/science.1072702. PMID 12446914. S2CID 13369396. ^ Hare, Brian; Tomasello, Michael (September 2005). "Human-like social skills in dogs?". Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 9 (9): 439–444. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2005.07.003. PMID 16061417. S2CID 9311402. ^ a b Miklósi, Adam; et al. (April 29, 2003). "A simple reason for a big difference: wolves do not look back at humans, but dogs do". Current Biology. 13 (9): 763–766. doi:10.1016/S0960-9822(03)00263-X. PMID 12725735. S2CID 10200094. ^ Gácsi, M; et al. (2009). "Explaining dog wolf differences in utilizing human pointing gestures: Selection for synergistic shifts in the development of some social skills". PLoS ONE. 4 (8): e6584. Bibcode:2009PLoSO...4.6584G. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0006584. PMC 2719091. PMID 19714197. ^ Range, F.; Virányi, Z. (2011). "Development of gaze following abilities in wolves (Canis lupus)". PLOS ONE. 6 (2): e16888. Bibcode:2011PLoSO...616888R. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016888. PMC 3044139. PMID 21373192. ^ Udell, M. A. R; Dorey, N. R.; Wynne, C. D. L. (December 2008). "Wolves outperform dogs in following human social cues". Animal Behaviour. 76 (6): 1767–1773. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2008.07.028. S2CID 11226439. ^ Udell, M. A. R.; Dorey, N. R.; Wynne, C. D. L. (2011). "Can your dog read your mind? Understanding the causes of canine perspective taking". Learning & Behavior. 39 (4): 289–302. doi:10.3758/s13420-011-0034-6. PMID 21643852. ^ a b Udell, M. A. R; Spencer, J. M.; Dorey, N. R.; Wynne, C. D. L. (2012). "Human-Socialized Wolves Follow Diverse Human Gestures... And They May Not Be Alone". International Journal of Comparative Psychology. 25 (2): 97–117. doi:10.46867/IJCP.2012.25.02.04. ^ Udell, M. A.; Giglio, R. F.; Wynne, C. D. (2008). "Domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) use human gestures but not nonhuman tokens to find hidden food". Journal of Comparative Psychology. 122 (1): 84–93. doi:10.1037/0735-7036.122.1.84. PMID 18298285. ^ Udell, M.A.R. (2014). "10. A Dog's-Eye View of Canine Cognition". In A. Horowitz (ed.). Domestic Dog Cognition and Behavior. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 221–240. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-53994-7_10. ISBN 978-3-642-53993-0. ^ Seal, U. S.; Mech, L. D. (July 1983). "Blood Indicators of Seasonal Metabolic Patterns in Captive Adult Gray Wolves". The Journal of Wildlife Management. 47 (3): 704–715. doi:10.2307/3808606. JSTOR 3808606. ^ Cunningham, D. J. (January 1906). "Cape Hunting Dogs (Lycaon pictus) in the Gardens of the Royal Zoological Society of Ireland". Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 25 (2): 843–848. doi:10.1017/S0370164600016667. ^ Kleiman, Devra G.; Malcom, James R. (1981). "The Evolution of Male Parental Investment in Mammals". In Gubernick, David J.; Klopfer, Peter H. (eds.). Parental Care in Mammals. Plenum Press. pp. 347–387. doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-3150-6_9. ISBN 978-0-306-40533-4. ^ Coppinger, Ray (2001). Dogs: a Startling New Understanding of Canine Origin, Behavior and Evolution. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-85530-1. ^ Pal, S. K. (2005). "Parental care in free-ranging dogs, Canis familiaris". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 90: 31–47. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2004.08.002. ^ Scott, M. Douglas; Causey, Keith (July 1973). "Ecology of Feral Dogs in Alabama". The Journal of Wildlife Management. 37 (3): 253–265. doi:10.2307/3800116. JSTOR 3800116. ^ a b Nesbitt, William H. (2009) [1975]. "Ecology of a Feral Dog Pack on a Wildlife Refuge". In Fox, Michael W. (ed.). Wild Canids: Their Systematics, Behavioral Ecology & Evolution (reprinted ed.). Dogwise Publishing. p. 391. ISBN 978-1-929242-64-1. ^ Duarte, Jesús (1 July 2016). "Depredatory impact of free-roaming domestic dogs on Mediterranean deer in southern Spain: implications for human-wolf conflict". Folia Zoologica. 65 (2): 135–141. doi:10.25225/fozo.v65.i2.a8.2016. S2CID 90407348 – via BioOne. ^ Green, Jeffrey S.; Gipson, Philip S. (September 1994). "Feral Dogs" (PDF). University of Nebraska – Lincoln. ^ Wedderburn, Pete (19 September 2017). "Why do dogs get upset stomachs – common causes and treatments". The Telegraph. Retrieved 28 December 2017. ^ "Why Your Dog Eats Poop, and Other Odd Pet Behavior Explained". 4 November 2017. Retrieved 28 December 2017. ^ "Everyone Poops. Some Animals Eat It. Why?". Smithsonian. Retrieved 28 December 2017. ^ "Would Your Dog Eat You if You Died? Get the Facts". National Geographic. 23 June 2017. Retrieved 28 December 2017. ^ Fonberg, E.; Kostarczyk, E.; Prechtl, J. (1981). "Training of Instrumental Responses in Dogs Socially Reinforced by Humans". The Pavlovian Journal of Biological Science. 16 (4): 183–193. doi:10.1007/BF03003358. PMID 7329743. S2CID 28014282. ^ Feuerbacher, E. N.; Wynne, C. D. L. (2015). "Shut up and pet me! Domestic dogs (Canis lupus familiaris) prefer petting to vocal praise in concurrent and single-alternative choice procedures". Behavioural Processes. 110: 47–59. doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2014.08.019. PMID 25173617. S2CID 13565641. ^ McIntire, Roger W.; Colley, Thomas A. (June 1967). "Social Reinforcement In The Dog". Psychological Reports. 20 (3): 843–846. doi:10.2466/pr0.1967.20.3.843. PMID 6042498. S2CID 33962156. ^ Berns, G. S.; Brooks, A.; Spivak, M. (2013). Brass, Marcel (ed.). "Replicability and Heterogeneity of Awake Unrestrained Canine fMRI Responses". PLOS ONE. 8 (12): e81698. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...881698B. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0081698. PMC 3852264. PMID 24324719. ^ Berns, G. S.; Brooks, A. M.; Spivak, M. (2015). "Scent of the familiar: An fMRI study of canine brain responses to familiar and unfamiliar human and dog odors". Behavioural Processes. 110: 37–46. doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2014.02.011. PMID 24607363. ^ Topál, J.; Miklósi, Á.; Csányi, V. (1997). "Dog-human relationship affects problem solving behavior in the dog". Anthrozoös. 10 (4): 214–224. doi:10.2752/089279397787000987. ^ Siniscalchi, Marcello; Stipo, Carlo; Quaranta, Angelo (2013). ""Like Owner, Like Dog": Correlation between the Owner's Attachment Profile and the Owner-Dog Bond". PLOS ONE. 8 (10): e78455. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...878455S. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0078455. PMC 3813613. PMID 24205235. ^ Lee, Mary R.; Olmert, Meg D.; Yount, Rick A. (2012). "Service Dog Training Program for Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress in Service Members" (PDF). U.S. Army Medical Department Journal: 63–9. PMID 22388685. Retrieved 30 September 2017. ^ Prynne, M. (November 6, 2013). "Dog attack laws and statistics". The Telegraph. Retrieved April 14, 2015. ^ "Dog bite hospitalisations highest in deprived areas". NHS Choices. 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2015. ^ Sacks, J.J.; Sinclair, L; Gilchrist, J; Golab, G. C.; Lockwood, R (2000). "Breeds of dogs involved in fatal human attacks between 1979 and 1998" (PDF). JAVMA. 217 (6): 836–840. doi:10.2460/javma.2000.217.836. PMID 10997153. S2CID 10817039. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2015. ^ Miklósi, Ádám (2007). Dog Behaviour, Evolution, and Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199295852.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-929585-2. ^ United States Congress. Senate. Committee on Commerce. Subcommittee on the Environment (1976). Animal Welfare Improvement Act of 1975: Hearing Before the Subcommittee on the Environment of the Committee on Commerce. United States Government. p. 111. Nearly 10 per cent of the dogs that have bitten people have received attack dog training. Further reading[edit] Donaldson, Jean (1991). The Culture Clash. James & Kenneth Publishers. Hare, Brian; Woods, Venessa (2013). The Genius of Dogs. Penguin Publishing Group. Jordan, Rain (2020). Such Small Hands: An Anti-Aversives Primer. Dog's Heart Press. Miklosi, Adam (2007). Dog Behaviour, Evolution, and Cognition. Oxford University Press. "Pet Behavior articles from the ASPCA". External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dog behavior. vteDogsTypes African village dogs Feral dogs Pye-dogs Street dogs Hairless dogs Herding dogs Collies Livestock guardian dogs Sheepdogs Hunting dogs Curs Feists Lurchers Gun dogs Pointers Retrievers Setters Spaniels Water dogs Hounds Scenthounds Bassets Coonhounds Foxhounds Sighthounds Longdogs Terriers Bull-type terriers Pinschers Schnauzers Mastiffs Bulldogs Spitz Huskies Laikas Tugous Toy dogs Bichons Turnspit dogs Breeds List of breeds List of crossbreeds Mixed-breed dogs Crossbreeds Extinct breeds Most popular Roles Assistance dogs Autism dogs Guide dogs Hearing dogs Medical response dogs Seizure dogs Mobility assistance dogs Therapy dogs Psychiatric service dogs Attack dogs Bay dogs Carriage dogs Catch dogs Companion dogs Detection dogs Fighting dogs Guard dogs Lap dogs Meat dogs Mercy dogs Pet dogs Police dogs Search and rescue dogs Sled dogs War dogs Behavior Communication Barking Howling Human–canine bond Intelligence Dog–cat relationship Human–doginteraction Animal testing Baiting Breed-specific legislation Dog bite Dog fighting Dog park Dog show Human–canine bond Dog sports Dog walking Dog daycare Dog grooming Therapy Fear of dogs Dog licence Dog meat Dog food dog biscuit 2007 recalls Dogs in religion Dogs in space Origin of the domestic dog Health Aging (Longest living individual dogs) Anatomy Breeding Coat Conformation Diseases Dog food Odor Rabies in animals Rage syndrome Reproduction Skin disorders Vaccination Training Clicker Crate training Training Housebreaking Socialization Related List of individual dogs List of fictional dogs Category Portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dog_behavior&oldid=1176431326" Categories: Dog training and behaviorEthologyHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2022All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingCommons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 September 2023, at 17:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement Toggle limited content width 

Skip to content Navigation Menu About UsAdventure Dog WalksBecome a Pet SitterBed & BreakfastBlogCat SittingCat Sitting ServicesCritter Care ServicesDog WalkingDog Walking BasicsDog Walking ServicesHouse SittingHouse Sitting ServicesMeet Our TeamOther Pet Care ServicesPolicies and ProceduresPuppy GuidePuppy WalksService AreaSign UpThank YouUrban TailzUrban Tailz ❤️ One Tail at a TimeWedding Pet CareWelcomeWelcome JDL ResidentsWelcome Mode Residents Different Cat Behaviors and What They Mean Decoding Cat Behaviors Working in the pet care business, we spend a lot of time reading animal body language and behavior. And while dogs are pretty clear with their signals and intentions, cats prove to be a little more mysterious. (Which, to be fair, is pretty on-brand for cats.)However, as a pet owner, it’s important to take time to understand their language, especially the little cute/weird things they do. Here are 12 different cat behaviors, decoded: 1. She Grooms Your Face At NightShe loves you, and is marking you as hers. For cats, grooming is a sign of social bonding, so it’s high praise! Granted, it can be annoying when you’re trying to sleep, and also kind of gross. If it becomes a problem, try to gently redirect her to some cat toys. 2. She Chews On Your Fingers She wants attention. How dare you text in her presence! Kittens sometimes do this when they’ve been weaned too early or are teething. It’s also a quick way of getting you to play with her, especially if, in the past, she’s been rewarded with playtime for doing this. 3. She Chirps Or “Clicks” At Birds Outside She wants to eat them. All of them. It’s a funny little sound, but according to The Humane Society, “some experts think that this is an exaggeration of the ‘killing bite,’ when a cat grabs its prey by the neck and works their teeth through the bones to snap them.” Cute. 4. She Paws At Closed DoorsShe owns the place and does not appreciate her access being restricted, thank you very much. Cats are curious and territorial. They want the option to patrol and explore. She could also want your attention, or access to food. If your cat paws at your bedroom door at night, try giving her a bedtime snack or treat puzzle before bed, something to keep her entertained. Also keep a scratching post in your bedroom so she has access to it in the night. Cats love to scratch! 5. She Makes a Crazy Yowl When She Brings You A ToyShe just brought you a serious prize and wants praise for her “kill.” When your cat does this, make sure to thank her and play with whatever toy she brought you. (Unless, of course, it is an actual dead animal.) 6. She Puts Toys In Her Food Or Water Dish She’s keeping it safe for later. According to this article from Pet Place, “in your cat’s world, her food and water dishes are part of her territory, a secure place for her to stash her valuables, much as if she were in the wild, hiding her prizes from potential predators.” 7. She Likes To Perch On Your Shoulder She wants attention and affection on her own terms. In general, cats like to be up high. It gives them a sense of safety and control. So while she may not like to be held, being on your shoulder is the next best way to snuggle. 8. She Shows You Her Belly She trusts you, but isn’t necessarily asking for a belly rub. Cats know their stomachs are their most vulnerable areas, which is why they guard them so fiercely. By exposing her stomach to you, she’s saying “I am comfortable with you and trust you.” It could also mean she’s in a playful mood. But, again, do not mistake this as a request for belly rubs! It could very well be the last thing you do. 9. She Smells Something, And Then Looks Like She’s About To SneezeShe’s processing information. We call this “butt face,” but the scientific term is actually The Flehmen Response. Cats have an extra olfactory organ, the Jacobson’s organ, located behind their front teeth. When they smell something particularly interesting (read: particularly stinky, like another cat’s butt), they’ll let the smell wash over this organ to gather more information. 10. She Head-Butts You Like A Hammerhead SharkShe’s bonding with you and marking you with her scent. A cat head butt isn’t strictly a territorial thing, though. “Cat bunting,” as it is actually called, is more complex than that. It’s a sign of respect and familiarity. 11. She Vibrates Her Tail Opinions are split on this, but we tend to think it’s excitement. Some sources say an upright vibrating tail is a sign of a cat preparing to spray/mark its territory. Others say it’s a sign of excitement. You know your cat better than anyone else, so take cues from her mood, body language or tail position. 12. She “Makes Biscuits” On The Bed (Or Your Body) She’s getting cozy by channeling her inner kitten. At a young age, cats learn to knead while nursing to stimulate milk flow. The behavior sticks with them, much like kids suck their thumbs or grown adults continue to sleep with stuffed animals. (You know who you are.) Another theory is she’s marking her spot. Cats have scent glands in their paws, so by kneading a blanket or spot on the bed, they’re calling dibs. When your cat kneads your body, she’s telling you she loves you. If her love language is free acupuncture, try putting a blanket in between you and her claws. share this post Erik I have been working for Urban Tailz since 2009 after moving to Chicago from Michigan. I have a background in sales and hospitality, and I strive to make Urban Tailz the Four Seasons of dog walking. PrevPreviousUltimate Guide to Dog Walking App/Software for Pet Care Companies NextAugust Pets of the Month: Darth and CryNext About UT Bed & Breakfast Sign Up Become a Pet Sitter Meet Our Team Policies and Procedures Service Area Urban Tailz 2528 N Linden PL Chicago, IL 60647 Phone: 773-250-1767 Email: info@urbantailz.com Links Adventure Dog Walks Bed & Breakfast Cat Sitting Services Critter Care Services Dog Walking Services House Sitting Services Wedding Pet Care Welcome JDL Residents Pet Sitting Hours 7am to 9:30pm 365 days a year Office Hours Mon-Fri 9am to 6pm Sat & Sun 9am to 3pm 

Insurance Care Health Behaviour Food Lifestyle Search CareBehaviorCats Cat Behaviors and Common Problems Explained 5 years ago by Petfeed Team ∙ 11 min read Share this Article The link has been copied! Have you ever sat at home, watching your cat, and wondered, "What could they possibly be trying to tell me?", or "Why on EARTH are they doing that?!” This cuttie on Youtube Sometimes, we can't always understand what our cat is up to, or why they are exhibiting a certain strange behavior, but we can have some a better idea from a combination of intuition and education. Let us explain! Oftentimes, when your cat is doing something a little out of the ordinary, they are trying to tell you that something is not quite right - whether it is with their behavior, health, environment, or something else. We know that trying to decipher these cat behavior problems can be tricky, but we’ve got some tips and tricks for getting to the root of many common problems. In this article, we are going to take a closer look at some bad cat behaviors and what they mean along with how you can help them if the situation presents itself again. Common Cat Behaviors and What They Mean Unusual or strange cat behaviors that your cat may be exhibiting when they are stressed or when something is wrong can vary depending on your pet, but often more than not, they tend to be fairly easy to spot. These cat habits and behaviors are key to understanding your cat and can include any of the following: Litter Box Problems If your cat has resorted to using the bathroom in places other than their litter box it’s important to know that they are not doing it to upset you. This feline behavior is often a sign of a behavioral or medical issue so learning how to understand your cat is important. Anxiety is a common culprit of this behavior and it’s up to you to figure out what is stressing your cat out. Have you moved recently, had house guests, or moved the litter box to a different spot? Whatever the case may be, it could be as simple as resolving the source of the anxiety. Medically, it could signal a vast number of problems such as diabetes, hyperthyroidism, kidney, liver, or urinary tract problem. If you’re not understanding your cat and there is no clear explanation for your cat's abnormal litter box behavior, a trip to the vet may be needed. Estrus Cats in heat or estrus display very clear behavioral signs that include but are not limited to rolling around, rubbing against any and everything, restlessness, excessive vocalization, and demandingly affectionate. It can be an extremely tiring and uncomfortable time for your female cat but there are steps you can take to help keep her calm and collected. One method you can try is offering her a warm towel to sit or lay on. This will help relax and soothe her anxiety. Distraction can also be helpful so playing with your cat or giving her a new toy could give her some relief. You can also try products such as Feliway or lavender oil which has a calming effect and can offer your cat some much-needed rest and relaxation. If estrus in hard on your cat, having her spayed is the best option. Not only will it keep your cat be more comfortable but it will also extend her natural lifespan. Spraying/Marking Territory This is often an instinctive urge that many pets have from their non-domesticated side. Our pets, especially cats, mark territory to stake their claim on their home and their family. While we often think of marking territory as urinating, marking territory can also come in the form of rubbing their fur against your leg or a piece of furniture or even scratching. Scratching When it comes to scratching, there can be many underlying reasons, and not because they are trying to get themselves into trouble! Cats often scratch furniture and other things for several reasons, including to groom their claws, as well as to mark their territory. Itching However, when we look at itching, it is typically an abnormal feline behavior that needs attention. Itching involves obsessively licking or scratching at their own fur, which can be caused by skin irritation, parasites, or other health conditions. Biting Biting is obviously a more serious feline behavior. Biting can be a dangerous matter and is often caused by the animal feeling a need to prove dominance, or even feeling defensive of its territory. In any case, if the biting becomes increasingly worse, it may be a good idea to take your cat to a professional trainer for advice on how to deal with the situation. Water Intake Have you noticed your cat drinking more water than usual? If so, it may not be a cause for concern. Many cats simply enjoy drinking water or like many pets, they eat or drink mainly when you are around so it’s more noticeable. They type of food you feed your cat could also be the answer since cats that eat dry food often drink more water to make up for the lack of hydration within dry cat food. If you’re still concerned, however, trust your instincts. You know your cat better than anyone so if the drinking is definitely excessive, make an appointment at your vet as it may be a symptom of kidney disease, diabetes, or hyperthyroidism (among other medical conditions). Excessive Peeing Is your cat peeing normal amounts frequently or small amounts frequently? That is the question! We know it may not seem like a big deal as to the amount your cat is peeing but it really is- it could help determine why your cat is peeing so much. Increased urination of normal amounts typically points to a urinary issue such as inflammation or a blockage while oliguria or excessive peeing in small amounts could indicate an obstruction such as bladder stones or an infection. In any case, if age, medication, or hormones is not a factor, it should be considered an emergency situation. Hiding Whether we want to believe it or not, our pets can also feel stressed or anxiety from time to time. In cats, it may cause them to hide more frequently than normal. True, it may be normal for your cat to hide and have some time to itself throughout the day, but if you notice that your cat is simply not coming out from their place under the bed or other hiding areas, it may be a cause for concern. Evaluate recent lifestyle changes that may be contributing to your cat’s behavior. Begging Most of the time, begging isn’t a cause for concern. Begging usually comes with the territory and they can be quite relentless! If you set boundaries, stick to a feeding schedule, and ignore the begging (even negative attention can reinforce your cat’s behavior...also, don’t give in!), you can successfully reduce or even stop the begging. It’s hard to believe but it’s possible! You should note, however, if the begging has reached a concerning level. While an increased appetite is common in older cats, households with multiple cats, and active cats, it could also be a symptom of a medical issue. Take a trip to the vet to rule out problems like parasites, diabetes, or cancer. Choking We have good news and bad news regarding choking in cats. The good news is that it’s actually pretty rare for cats to choke. The bad news is that if your cat is truly choking, there isn’t a lot you can do besides getting her to the vet as quickly as possible. In the circumstance that your cat becomes unconscious, you may be able to open the mouth to see if you can locate the source of the blockage. Items such as food, toys, string, and of course, hairballs could all cause your cat to choke. If the culprit is a string, we recommend going to the vet and not attempting to pull it out as you could cause severe damage. Hissing Cat owners are definitely no strangers to hissing, and if your cat is hissing at you, it is time to back off. Hissing is a good indicator of impending aggression to follow, but it also signifies that the cat is feeling bothered or even frightened. If you notice your cat is hissing and being more aggressive than normal, there may be something that is affecting their daily routine or environment that is making them feel defensive or frightened and may need to be looked into as well. Over Grooming Over grooming can come in many forms and severities, and can also be caused by a bevy of factors as well. In some cases, over grooming is a behavioral issue, also known as psychogenic alopecia. This basically means that over grooming is a stress reliever for your cat, and if not treated and stopped can lead to severe hair loss and other irritation to their skin. On the other hand, over grooming can also be a sign of a medical problem that is on the rise. Either way, it is best to schedule an appointment with your vet if you notice over grooming becoming more of an issue for your feline. Rolling/Kneading Sometimes, the behaviors that your cats are exhibiting are simply because they want some love and attention! This is the case for rolling onto their back or rolling over at your feet. Your cat is simply trying to tell you that they want your attention after a long day and that they need to be petted, cuddled, or simply talked to. Kneading can also fit the bill but in some circumstances; the kneading behavior is also instinctual. Kittens all the way through to adult cats will knead their paws throughout their lifetime, and it starts at the very beginning when they are nursing. It can also be contributed to their need to mark territory, as the pads on their paws have scent glands in them as well. Chewing Chewing is a tricky cat behavior to deal with, and can also cause a heap of problems for you and your family when it becomes destructive. Chewing is often a cat habit that can be linked with boredom. Felines are highly intelligent creatures, and often need stimulation throughout their day. To keep them from chewing on items that aren't theirs, make sure to get them interactive and stimulating toys and things to chew on that will keep them busy when everyone is out. Depression This is definitely a stranger cat behavior, especially since it can also include other behaviors that we have already talked about on this list. Cats can exhibit signs of depression, but it is not the same type of emotional symptoms that we see with humans. If your cat is feeling depressed, they will often show symptoms like loss of appetite, avoiding or hiding a lot, more lethargic than normal, and other abnormal behaviors, such as hissing more than usual. Cat Body Language And Vocalization Among the cat behavior problems that we’ve talked about here already, one of the most prevalent that you will notice as a cat owner is a vocalization. It is so important to listen to your cat when they are trying to talk to you, as there can be critical differentiations to the sounds. @maple.cat Learning how to understand your cat is vital for all cat owners, and some cat sounds that they use for interaction can include the following: Meowing Well, obviously, all cats meow! The key is knowing that the reason behind the meows often changes as they continue to age. As your cat gets older, meowing is simply an outlet for communication. They use it to tell us what is needed, or that they are wanting attention. The problem is when the meowing seems to become more excessive than normal, it can be caused by a multitude of things. This can include illness, stress, or other issues as well. You may want to schedule an appointment with your vet to rule out any dangerous illnesses or problems that could be on the horizon. Howling Excessive howling can often be a good indicator that something is not right in the health department. This can often be considered a cry of pain (we will discuss crying further in this section), and it is important to schedule an appointment with the vet right away to find the source of the pain and trouble before it gets problematic. Yowling Yowling is a meow that is often more drawn out and loud. Yowling is more prevalent in adult cats and can be heard more often during breeding. It is often not something to be alarmed about, but if it becomes excessive, it’s worth having your furbaby checked out. Crying As we mentioned before, a cry or a howl can be signs of distress. This could be from something painful, illness, or getting caught in an unfortunate predicament. If you notice that the crying seems more pain induced, contact your vet immediately! Hissing Hissing is a sign of aggression, or rather aggression that is about to bubble to the surface (yikes!). Your cat will often hiss when they feel: Defensive Stressed Anxious Frightened It can also be a sign that something is wrong behaviorally, such as depression (as we discussed). It is important to get a second opinion from a vet or other professional to find out why the excessive hissing may be occurring. Whining We would classify whining as a similar sound and vocalization to crying, but not as extreme in some cases. Whining can happen to draw attention to anything, whether it be the need for water, food, love, or that they just aren't quite feeling right that day, either behaviorally or physically. It can also be coupled with various forms of body language as well. This can range from rolling on their back, showing different facial expressions, crouching, and just seeming more tense or aggressive. If you see body language that doesn't appear normal for the personality of your cat, including the behaviors that we have already listed here, get them checked out. Kitten Behavior It is important to note that with all of these cat behavior problems and vocalizations, we are talking about adult cats! Kittens are far more different when it comes to their needs and wants, as they are younger and sometimes just trying to stand on their four feet. That said, when your kitten is exhibiting nonstop vocalizations, it is often because they need to nurse, want to be with their mother, want attention, or have gotten themselves stuck in a sticky situation. Kittens understandably show a lot more interest and curiosity in their surroundings, and the best indicator in finding out how they are feeling is through two things - their tail and their ears. Perked up ears show that they are ready to explore and are intrigued by something in their environment. On the other hand, a kitten's tail (like adult cats) can tell you how they are feeling whether it is aggressive, intrigued, or frightened. Monitor Your Cat’s Behavior Now that you know what cat behavior signs and sounds to look for, the next step is being able to observe worrisome behaviors consistently. Between work, the gym, and running errands, it can prove harder than at first thought. If only we could clone ourselves! While that certainly isn’t going to happen soon, there is the next best thing - a pet camera. There are many reasons why they are so beneficial for pet owners, but being able to know that your pet is healthy and happy is one of the best. Petcube Play is an invaluable tool for monitoring your cat’s behavior and it’s easy to use. The camera is connected through an app with your phone allowing you to monitor, talk to, and interact with your dog or cat through 2-way audio and a 1080p HD video camera. How’s that for being in two places at once! Honestly, the important thing to remember with your cat is that communication is at the center of their personality. Every single thing they do can be a channel for communication with their owners, their families, and other animals. Whether this is through marking their territory with their fur and scent, vocalizing their opinions, or simply a twitch of their tail, they are letting us know what is going on and what they need. Your cat is in constant communication with you. About the Author: Nadine Rich is a business owner of a pet spa for over 12 years now and founder of Models Supporting Animals. Was this article helpful? Help us make our articles even better Yes No Thank you for your feedback Share this Article The link has been copied! You might also like Dogs by Kim L What Can I Feed My Dog Instead of Dog Food? Dogs by Claudia Smargiasso Can Dogs Have Salt and Pepper? Other Pets by Claudia Smargiasso What Natural Foods Can Hamsters Eat? Newer Article Traveling with Dogs: Tips for Planning a Successful Dog Vacation Older Article Is My Cat Depressed? The Sad Cat Decoded Stay tuned to our updates and special offers Submit I have read the Privacy Policy and Terms of Use Processing your application There was an error sending the email Great! Check your inbox and click the link to confirm your subscription Insurance Care Health Behaviour Food Lifestyle Authors Petfeed - Pet Care Tips, How-to Guides, Funny Stories, Comics, and Videos © 2023. All Right Reserved. Published with Ghost & Maido. You've successfully subscribed to Petfeed - Pet Care Tips, How-to Guides, Funny Stories, Comics, and Videos Welcome back! You've successfully signed in. Great! You've successfully signed up. Success! Your email is updated. Your link has expired Success! Your account is fully activated, you now have access to all content. A Pet Parent? Subscribe to receive a free dog anxiety treatment guide. Send me the free guide I have read the Privacy Policy and Terms of Use This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply Get professional vet advice for free Stop Googling your pet’s symptoms. Sign up now to unlock the deal Sign Up I have read the Privacy Policy and Terms of Use This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply OK 

Skip to Main Content Close Subtotal: $0 Pay in full or in 4 interest-free installments of $0 with ShopPay Proceed to Checkout Shipping Immediately Backordered You might also like: Really Great Cat Litter - $29 Size 1 month supply 3 months supply Add to cart Cove Litter Box - $199 Style Cove + Shelter Cove (doesn't include high walls) Add to cart Your cart is empty Close Search website Search Free US shipping on orders $195+ Open Menu tuft + paw Homepage Shop Cat Furniture Shop Cat Litter Log in Search website Open Cart Open Cart Close Shop Cat Furniture Shop Cat Litter Log in Search website Emails for cat people. You are already subscribed! Email Address Join Be the first person to hear about sales, new product announcements, and more. Email us [email protected] Facebook Instagram Pinterest Youtube Now Reading: The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language Share: Share article on Facebook Share article on Twitter Share article on Pinterest Previous Article Next Article Home Cat Education Center The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language End litter tracking TODAY with 25% OFF Really Great Cat Litter ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ tuft + paw's flushable cat litter formula is the lowest-tracking cat litter you'll ever use. That's because the large, dust-free pellets don't get stuck in your cat's toe beans. Every cat (and cat parent) deserves a clean home, so we made a discount code for you to use on your first order 🙂 Use code CLEANHOME for 25% off Cats, like human-beings, reveal their inner states through their body language. At tuft + paw, we spend a ton of time researching cats in order to design our cat furniture. We have both a cat behaviorist and a veterinarian on our team, so we have a lot of insight into why cats behave a certain way. For this guide, we sat down with Feline Behavior Expert Marci Koski to figure out exactly how to tell the difference between a cat that’s anxious, fearful, or angry and one that’s friendly and comfortable. We’ll also share some fun stories that will help you understand some common cat body language quirks. The first step in reading a cat's body language is understanding the context. There are many physical cues of a cat's mood, but their meaning can vary depending on the context. For example, one of the most reliable signs of a confident cat is a tail that’s lifted vertically, high in the air. Most of the time, this tail position indicates that the cat feels comfortable and open to interaction. However, in certain contexts – like warding off a strange cat in his own territory – a high tail can also indicate a willingness to attack. The high tail can represent a confident cat or a potentially aggressive cat depending on the scenario. So, when it comes to reading cat body language, the key is to pay attention not only to physical cues, but also the situation in which they take place, which is the approach we'll be following in this guide. When considering context, it’s important to try to see things from your cat’s perspective. People often approach cats with good intentions, get scratched or bitten, and then blame the cat for being mean-tempered. What’s missing is an assessment of how the cat might have perceived the gesture. One should always consider whether the situation feels safe for the cat or might be causing them fear or anxiety. A dark, confined environment that a cat can’t easily escape from produces more stress than a wide open comfortable room where surroundings can be seen, which is why cats usually love relaxing on high open perches. Sprout Modern Cat Tower by tuft + paw - Shop Here Credit: @jessoliverbagett A quality cat tower (check out our guide to the best cat trees) is a great way to provide a multi-purpose space for your cat to observe, relax, play, and withdraw when they're feeling overwhelmed. If the cat is familiar with everyone in the environment and also has a personal spot they know they can retreat to, a cat will likely feel safer and you can assume more comfort. When gauging a cat’s mood, take in the big picture first. All sensory inputs – sights, sounds, smells – should be taken into account to provide the most accurate idea of how a cat might feel. If you’re still unsure, you can look to individual components of the cat’s body language and put the pieces together to figure out what your cat might be feeling. Without any further ado, let’s look at the most significant component of a cat’s body language: posture. Posture/Body Position: Open or Closed? It’s helpful to remember that as animals, cats evolved as both predators and prey. When cats encounter threatening circumstances, they feel like prey and become scared. When scared, cats are likely to try and protect their body as much as possible by scrunching up into a small, less exposed shape. A tense, ball-like posture can also be a sign that your cat is in pain. When a cat stretches out, they’re voluntarily exposing themselves – this shows that they don’t feel threatened. On the other hand, a ball-shaped cat is usually not feeling open to advances. A cat that’s feeling anxious or worried might also crouch down, low to the ground. If they stop and freeze when they see you, you can be sure they’re not feeling comfortable. Tip: If you notice your cat is frequently assuming closed postures (e.g. when strangers come over) but doesn't have a place they can retreat to that still allows them to see the room, consider adding some high perches in your home. We've already mentioned cat trees, but another great option is a window hammock or wall-mounted shelf. Cloud Nine Window Hammock by tuft + paw - Shop Here Credit: @stormy_thebritish There’s a big difference, however, between a cat stretching out in relaxation and a cat making itself bigger as a form of defense. When a cat is fearful or angry to the point of being willing to fight, they'll often make themselves as big as possible in various ways. A classic example is when a cat puts its back all the way up and stands sideways to the threat – a cat with their back arched in this position is telling you they're terrified. When a cat’s back is arched, their hair often stands up too. (The term for hair standing up in this way is piloerection.) Both behaviors make the cat look bigger and more intimidating. A cat exhibiting these behaviors might be ready to stand their ground and fight. Body orientation also important to consider. Cats forecast their intentions and next moves by pointing their body in the direction they are likely to go. If a cat is standing sideways to you, they might be feeling shy and considering escape. With a sideways body position, the cat has the advantage of being able to take off fast if a chase occurs. The crouched-down body position enables the cat to spring off and start running quickly, should they feel the need. If a cat is pointing their body and head toward you, they may be interested in you and receptive to your advances. A cat who faces away from you may not necessarily be disinterested, however – their letting their guard down around you can also signal comfort and willing to be touched – so get a feel for the context. A Cat On Its Back – a.k.a. “the Venus Cat Trap” Remember, no single sign or indicator of body language is guaranteed, so caution when interacting with cats is usually the best policy. For proof of this, you can ask anyone that’s ever been a victim of the Venus Cat Trap. Many people, after they learn that a cat exposing itself feels comfortable, may see a cat with its belly up and think that it’s safe to rub or pet the cat’s belly. The exposed belly is a sign of comfort and trust, but it is not necessarily an invitation for a belly rub. Many people have touched a cat’s stomach only to have its owner instantly seize-up, latching onto their hand with claws and teeth. The Venus Cat Trap can be avoided with some care and sensitivity to context. In one context, a cat laying on its back and exposing its belly is expressing relaxation, trust, and security. In a different context, the cat is indicating that it’s ready to fight off an aggressor, since this position allows for the claws to be ready and defensively effective. Dylan often appears relaxed with his belly exposed, but don’t be fooled! If you go to pet his stomach, you’ll become his prey very quickly. Kip Cat Cushion by tuft + paw - Shop Here Credit: @buckminsterscatcafe Benny, on the other hand, loves tummy rubs. Kip Cat Cushion by tuft + paw - Shop Here Credit: @m0ldypeach The more you know about a cat’s personality, the more you can understand their perspective, and so the context of the situation. Knowing the different preferences of Dylan and Benny, for example, will help you avoid the Venus Cat Trap. The Tail: A Barometer of Confidence A cat’s tail is one of the first places to look for signs of their mood. As mentioned earlier, a high, vertical tail indicates a cat that’s feeling confident, comfortable, happy, and friendly, and a low tail indicates a cat that’s feeling fearful or anxious. It’s helpful to think about the shape a cat is making and how it relates to the overall situation. A very fearful cat might not only keep its tail down, but tuck it between its legs; this is done to present a target that’s as small as possible to aggressors. And a high, puffed-out tail might indicate a cat trying to make itself bigger to intimidate potential foes. Why do cats flick their tails? Two other actions a cat’s tail can exhibit are vibration and flicking. When a cat’s tail quivers, it can be a sign of happy excitement. This may appear similar to the vibrating movement a cat’s tail makes before it spray-marks something with urine. Again, however, context is everything – if a cat greets you with this gesture she is excited to see you. Flicking, on the other hand, can be a sign of agitation or alertness. For example, Abbey, who can be moody and sometimes even a Venus Cat Trap, will sometimes show her lack of receptivity by flicking her tail. When she receives attention and pets, she’ll often go from excited and happy to simply tolerant and then to upset. Her body language gives clues at each stage, and when she flicks her tail, it’s time to back off. Tail flicking doesn't always indicate agitation though. Cats who are engaged in hunting behaviors (whether real or play) will often flick their tails as they watch their prey. If you're using an exciting cat toy and your cat is going crazy for it, chances are there's some tail flicking going on before they pounce. In this situation, tail flicking is a sign of stimulation and alertness. Ears: For Hearing and for Showing Ear position is another place to look for clues about a cat’s mood. Normal, forward ears indicate a cat that’s feeling confident, relaxed, or engaged. As always, however, context is essential for understanding. When a cat’s ears stand straight up, the cat is increasing their exposure, and you may be fooled into thinking it’s at ease; instead, sometimes the high, erect ear position indicates alertness or a desire to play. A cat with ears turned back is usually a good sign that a cat is feeling angry or fearful When a cat protects their ears by flattening them to the side, you can almost always be sure that they’re feeling afraid. (Some people will refer to ears in this position as “airplane ears.”) Dharma is a cat that likes to hang out in her owner’s closet. A former feral cat, Dharma is now more comfortable and confident. She still needs a place in which she can rest and hide from the world, though, and she chooses the closet. When new people come looking for her in the closet, she can feel threatened. When a person enters the closet, Dharma makes herself as small as possible, and that includes her ears. Dharma’s ears get so flat on her head, they look like they’ve been plastered there. Eyes: The Windows to the Mood A cat’s posture, tail, and ears will probably tell you what you need to know, but if you’re still unsure, take a look at their eyes. When a cat trusts you and feels comfortable around you, they might blink at you slowly. A slowly blinking cat is usually a comfortable one. A cat’s pupils are another good way to tell how relaxed or stimulated it is. Relaxed eyes usually belong on a cat that’s feeling comfortable. When a cat’s pupils are large and dilated, that means it’s stimulated. Stimulation is not necessarily good or bad. A cat that’s feeling playful will often have dilated pupils. However, dilated pupils can also indicate fear, excitement, or anger. Consider the context to decide. The famous cat slow blink Cats blink slowly to show affection and relaxation. If a cat blinks slowly at you, they are not threatened by you – in fact, they trust you. To bond with a cat that blinks slowly at you, you can return their gesture by blinking slowly back at them. This is a great way to communicate with your cats. Whiskers If you’ve taken in all the other signs and you still want more information, check out a cat’s whiskers. Compared to a cat’s posture, tail, ears, and eyes, the whiskers aren’t going to tell you as much, but they may provide a helpful hint. Fearful cats bring the whiskers close to the face This action is yet another example of a fearful cat’s tendency to try and make itself smaller. Confident cats, by contrast, might push their whiskers forward. Vocalization: Cat Noises Although not “body language” per se, the noises a cat makes – their vocalizations – are a cat’s most overt ways of telling you its feelings. What makes a cat purr? Most people understand that purring is a good sign, but, in fact, like most other indicators, it’s not guaranteed. Purring is a sign of pleasure – it’s the most obvious way to tell when a cat is happy. However, cats may also purr when they’re in pain! Many veterinarians report that cats purr when they’re injured or feeling sick. The Fear/Aggression Vocalization Series When a cat wants you to understand that they’re feeling threatened, they may go through a series of vocalizations, increasing in intensity as their discomfort increases. First comes the growl. A growling cat is warning you to back off. Next is the hiss: Why do cats hiss? Hissing indicates that a cat is feeling threatened and may be getting ready to fight or flee; hissing is also a very effective way of showing a potential aggressor that the cat is armed with sharp fangs. The yowl usually comes after the hiss. Finally, a cat that’s shrieking feels that they’re out of options and is about to make their stand or retreat. Chirping and Chattering – What Does it Mean? Chirping and chattering are two vocalizations that are expressed for the same reason. A cat will chirp and chatter if there is potential prey nearby that it cannot attack. For example, if your cat is chirping at the window, they may see a bug that they would love to capture – but that is safe behind a screen. Chirping and chattering indicate excitement tempered by frustration. Puff Modern Cat Bed by tuft + paw - Shop Here What is trilling? Trilling sounds a bit like purring but has a much higher pitch - almost like a bell on a bicycle. Mother cats trill to communicate with their kittens. When a cat trills, it’s probably feeling friendly and familial. Cats often trill to their owners to greet them. Why is my cat constantly meowing? Meowing is one of the most ambiguous types of cat vocalizations because a cat meows for many reasons. Meowing could mean almost anything, from hunger to simple chattiness. Like most other body language signs and behaviors that cats exhibit, meowing should be analyzed as a part of the cat’s larger context. Constant meowing, however, may indicate that something is wrong. If a cat won’t stop meowing and seems to be in pain, it’s time for a trip to the vet. If they meow every day, even after eating, maybe your cat is just chatty – some cats, and breeds, are more vocal than others. Putting It All Together Cats have earned a reputation for being hard to read, but it’s not their fault – they just communicate differently than humans. With their posture, tails, ears, eyes, whiskers, and vocalizations, they’ll tell you whether they’re comfortable or not. The main takeaway is that a cat’s body language and behaviors should be looked at as a part of single big picture. By using the context of the entire situation, trying to see the situation from the cat’s point of view, and looking for subtle cues in body language, you’ll have an excellent chance at understanding your feline friends. Suggested Reading Why Is My Cat Going Outside the Litter Box? How to Choose the Right Litter 5 Best Non-Tracking Cat Litters 5 Best Natural Cat Litters 10 Best Cat Trees Cove: The Modern Litter Box We wanted to share an endorsement for our brand new Cove litter box. Cove is a simple, beautiful litter box with an integrated scoop, dustpan, and handbrush. Built by designers, engineers, and cat behaviorists and made from recycled plastics that are completely toxin-free. Visit the Cove page for more details on how you can get your hands on one. More details can be found here > p.s. Have you tried Really Great Cat Litter? Our flushable formula is 99% dust-free, low tracking, ultra absorbent, clumping, and eliminates odor on the spot. Liked what you read? Share us on: Share article on Facebook Share article on Twitter Share article on Pinterest About tuft + paw We're a modern brand for people who love cats. Our team includes cat behaviorists, veterinarians, industrial designers, and engineers. Our goal is to improve the quality of cat education and cat products. Search Search Community Forums Here at tuft + paw, we're cat experts. Ask our cat behaviorist and vet anything about cats and we'll get back to you within a few days. Visit Forum Article has 14 comments Leave a comment Name Email Comment Post comment All comments are moderated before being published. Comment written by Siena Bauer Comment published on September 07, 2023 Thanks so much!!!! My cat Wolfy can be very hard to read 😹. He uses the Venus cat trap A LOT. thanks again!! Comment written by Susie Comment published on September 07, 2023 Does anyone else’s cat ever puff up their fur – piloerection, sideways stance, dilated pupils, but in the midst of PLAYING? Like, she will initiate it, while we are all sitting around by the back door, and she’ll have a crazy 5 minutes running back and forth to the open door, puffed right up and we have a game where we now imitate her and stand side on with our arms out and walk like a crab and with wide eyes and she loves it. She is 100% playing and having a crazy burst of activity before flopping down again to nap. She runs back and forth to the door to get your attention and to get you to join in, there is no way she feels threatened by us in those circumstances! But I can’t find any sources on the internet that suggest it’s playful, but I know my cat!! Maybe she’s just a weird one, even for a cat! Comment written by Connor Hobart Comment published on April 06, 2020 Thanks for this article, it was really helpful to me! Comment written by Sharon Comment published on April 06, 2020 We have a male neutered cat. When he gets in my lap he will rub his head on me, he may lick my cheek, but then he bites my chin. Is biting like that a positive behavior on his part, or not. Comment written by Gloria May Comment published on April 06, 2020 My cat usually lays on either side when he stretches out. Lately he mostly hunkers down. He maintains a decent appetite but I’m afraid he isn’t comfortable, perhaps an internal problem. Comment written by Erin Comment published on April 06, 2020 This really helped me with body language of a cat for my project thanks you😊 Comment written by Mike Comment published on April 06, 2020 Great guide! Comment written by Robert Comment published on April 06, 2020 Would like to share that I believe I have read my cats response to satisfying an itch he feels as him licking his paw. The itch is probably a minor skin condition as the vet found nothing but any time I touch his back he licks his paw….even while eating !! Comment written by SilverStream Comment published on April 06, 2020 i had to randomly stop reading because of a flee on my cts face i dont think she knew she wsnt very happy about Comment written by Jason Comment published on April 06, 2020 Great article on cat body language. Really works. Thank you. Comment written by Tommy Comment published on September 30, 2019 I have one adult cat, and five 4 month old kittens; the five kittens were born feral. All six felines love their bellies rubbed! Comment written by clare Comment published on September 30, 2019 Black Beauty was sitting in a prime cat spot, on a table in front of the bedroom window. When I spoke lovey talk to her she yawned a few times. Wat does yawning mean? Comment written by Anushka Comment published on September 30, 2019 This really helped me to figure out how my newly-adopted cat felt like. Comment written by Miumiu Comment published on June 16, 2019 Thanks for sharing such a completed guide from facial behaviors to body language. I learn more about kitties although I am a mother of a cat for 2 years. Especially, I don’t know why my cat doesn’t allow me touching his opened belly until I read “the Venus Cat Trap” in this post! I think he is dependent enough to stay alone for 3 days as he always refuses my petting. However, last weeks, I left home 3 days for errands after making all preparation. I checked out the camera record every night and found that he meowed constantly, scratched the door of my bedroom, and roamed around the house anxiously. When I came home, he was very clingy and excited. I think he might have a little separation anxiety. I intend to raise one more cat as a companion for the elder one. This is a great way to treat separation anxiety I saw. Also, my friends said her two cats spend their time chasing and playing each other, never have separation anxiety! Related Guides 7 Best Cat Scratching Posts of 2023 Cats have a natural instinct to scratch, and if you want to save your furnitu... How to Stop Your Cat From Scratching the Carpet We all love cats, but their instinct to scratch can sometimes lead to frustra... 5 Best Modern Cat Scratching Posts in 2023 A scratching post is an essential outlet for your cat’s natural scratching in... We send emails for cat people. Receive emails on cat education, new product announcements and more. Enter your email Join the Club Facebook Instagram Pinterest Youtube Our Story Cat Education Center Privacy Policy Partners Careers Shipping & Returns Contact Community Forums Facebook Instagram Pinterest Youtube Tiktok Join our VIP cat lovers club You are already subscribed! Join 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Communication Toggle Communication subsection 1.1Body language 1.1.1The tail 1.1.2The eyes 1.2Scent rubbing and spraying 1.3Body postures 2Grooming 3Kneading 4Panting 5Reflexes Toggle Reflexes subsection 5.1Righting reflex 5.2Freeze reflex 6Eating patterns 7Sleeping patterns 8Excretion 9Socialization Toggle Socialization subsection 9.1Colony organization 9.2Social learning 9.3Socialization between cats 9.3.1Social conflicts 9.4Socialization with humans 10Predatory behavior 11Environment 12See also 13References Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Cat behavior 3 languages ČeštinaEspañol한국어 Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Behavior of cats This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Cat behavior" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Cat behavior is a cat's behavior and responses to events and other stimuli. Cat behavior includes body language, elimination habits, aggression, play, communication, hunting, grooming, urine marking, and face rubbing. It varies among individuals, colonies, and breeds. Communication and sociability can vary greatly among individual cats. In a family with many cats, the interactions can change depending on which individuals are present and how restricted the territory and resources are. One or more individuals may become aggressive: fighting may occur with the attack, resulting in scratches and deep bite wounds. Communication[edit] Main article: Cat communication A staring cat Kittens vocalize early in development. Some examples of different vocalizations are described below.[1] Purring - means that the cat is either content or is self-soothing due to fear Meowing - a frequently used greeting. A mother meows when interacting with her young. Meows can also be used when a cat wishes for attention. [2] Hissing or spitting - indicates an angry or defensive cat. Yowling - means that the cat is in distress or feeling aggressive. Chattering - occurs when hunting or tracking potential prey. This consists of quick chirps made while the mouth vibrates. The gaze is fixed and staring. This behavior may be in response to a surge of adrenaline or may be caused by the anticipation of a pending hunt.[3] Body language[edit] Cats greeting by rubbing against each other; the upright "question mark shape" tails indicate happiness or friendship Cats rely strongly on body language to communicate. A cat may rub against an object or lick a person. Much of a cat's body language is through its tail, ears, head position, and back posture. The tail[edit] Observing how a cat holds its tail can give a good sense of the cat’s current temperament. Held high, may have a slight curl forward - a sign of friendliness. The cat is happy, content, and comfortable. The tail may quiver or vibrate if the cat is excited. Held low and tucked under - a sign of fear or unease. The cat is attempting to make itself a smaller target to potential threats. Flicking, twitching - a sign of agitation. The cat is on high alert or is upset, and is not receptive to interaction. Cats may also flick their tails in an oscillating, snake-like motion, or abruptly from side to side, often just before pouncing on an object or animal. [4] The eyes[edit] When cats greet another cat in their vicinity, they can do a slow, languid, long blink to communicate affection if they trust the person or animal they are in contact with. One way to communicate love and trust to a cat is to say its name, get its attention, look it in the eyes and then slowly blink at it to emulate trust and love. They may return the gesture.[5] In a study of 18 cats, the cat behavior of several half-blinks followed by a prolonged eye narrowing or eye closure was found to be a positive emotional response. When a familiar human slow-blinks towards a cat, the cat tends to approach the human more frequently than if the human has a neutral expression that avoids eye contact. This behavior may share features with the "genuine" human smile that involves the corners of the eyes narrowing.[6] Scent rubbing and spraying[edit] These behaviors are thought to be a way of marking territory. Facial marking behavior is used to mark their territory as "safe". The cat rubs its cheeks on prominent objects in the preferred territory, depositing a chemical pheromone, known as a contentment pheromone. Synthetic versions of the feline facial pheromone are available commercially.[7][8] Cats have anal sacs or scent glands. Scent is deposited on the feces as it is eliminated. Unlike intact male cats, female and neutered male cats usually do not spray urine. Spraying is accomplished by backing up against a vertical surface and spraying a jet of urine on that surface. Unlike a dog's penis, a cat's penis points backward. Males neutered in adulthood may still spray after neutering. Urinating on horizontal surfaces in the home outside the litter box may indicate dissatisfaction with the box, due to a variety of factors such as substrate texture, cleanliness and privacy. It can also be a sign of urinary tract problems. Male cats on poor diets are susceptible to crystal formation in the urine, which can block the urethra and create a medical emergency. Body postures[edit] A cat's posture communicates its emotions. It is best to observe cats' natural behavior when they are by themselves, with humans, and with other animals.[9] Their postures can be friendly or aggressive, depending on the situation. Some of the most basic and familiar cat postures include:[10][11] Relaxed posture – The cat is seen lying on the side or sitting. Its breathing is slow to normal, with legs bent, or hind legs laid out or extended. The tail is loosely wrapped, extended, or held up. It also hangs down loosely when the cat is standing. Stretching posture – another posture indicating the cat is relaxed.Cat yawning postureYawning posture – either by itself or in conjunction with a stretch: another posture of a relaxed cat. Alert posture – The cat is lying on its belly, or it may be sitting. Its back is almost horizontal when standing and moving. Its breathing is normal, with its legs bent or extended (when standing). Its tail is curved back or straight upward, and there may be twitching while the tail is positioned downward. Tense posture – The cat is lying on its belly, with the back of its body lower than its upper body (slinking) when standing or moving back. Its legs, including the hind legs, are bent, and its front legs are extended when standing. Its tail is close to the body, tensed or curled downward. There can be twitching when the cat is standing up. Anxious/ovulating posture – The cat is lying on its belly. The back of the body is visibly lower than the front part when the cat is standing or moving. Its breathing may be fast, and its legs are tucked under its body. The tail is close to the body and may be curled forward (or close to the body when standing), with the tip of the tail moving up and down or side to side. Fearful posture – The cat is lying on its belly or crouching directly on top of its paws. Its entire body may be shaking and very near the ground when standing up. Breathing is fast, with the cat's legs bent near the surface, and its tail is curled and very close to its body when standing on all fours. Confident posture – The cat may walk around in a more comfortable manner with its tail up to the sky, indicating its importance. Cats often walk through houses with their tail standing up high above them, making them look grander and more elegant. Terrified posture – The cat is crouched directly on top of its paws, with visible shaking seen in some parts of the body. Its tail is close to the body, and can be standing up, together with its hair on the back. The legs are very stiff or even bent to increase their size. Typically, cats avoid contact when they feel threatened, although they can resort to varying degrees of aggression when they feel cornered, or when escape is impossible.[12] Relaxing cat Stretching cat Yawning cat Yawning kitten Alert cat Tense cat Fearful cat Terrified cat Grooming[edit] Cat grooming itself Oral grooming for domestic and feral cats is a common behavior; recent studies on domestic cats show that they spend about 8% of resting time grooming themselves. Grooming is extremely important not only to clean themselves but also to ensure ectoparasite control. Fleas tend to be the most common ectoparasite of cats, and some studies allude to indirect evidence that grooming in cats is effective in removing fleas. Cats not only use their tongue for grooming to control ectoparasites, and scratch grooming may also aid in dislodging fleas from the head and neck.[13] Kneading[edit] Main article: Kneading (cats) Classic kneading of a cat Kittens "knead" the breast while suckling, using the forelimbs one at a time in an alternating pattern to push against the mammary glands to stimulate lactation in the mother. Cats carry these infantile behaviors beyond nursing and into adulthood. Some cats "nurse," i.e. suck, on clothing or bedding during kneading. The cat exerts firm downward pressure with its paw, opening its toes to expose its claws, then closes its claws as it lifts its paw. The process takes place with alternate paws at intervals of one to two seconds. The cat may knead while sitting on its owner's lap, which may prove painful if the cat has sharp claws. Because most of the preferred "domestic traits" are neotenous, or juvenile traits that persist in the adult, kneading may be a relic juvenile behavior retained in adult domestic cats.[14] It may also stimulate the cat and make it feel good, in the same manner as a human stretching. Kneading is often a precursor to sleeping. Many cats purr while kneading. They also purr mostly when newborn, when feeding, or when trying to feed on their mother's teat. The common association between the two behaviors may corroborate the evidence in favor of the origin of kneading as a remnant instinct.[15] Panting[edit] A cat panting Unlike dogs, panting is a rare occurrence in cats, except in warm weather environments. Cats may pant in response to anxiety, fear or excitement. Panting can also be caused by play, exercise, or stress from things like car rides. However, if panting is excessive or the cat appears in distress, it may be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as a nasal blockage, heartworm disease, head trauma, or drug poisoning.[16] In many cases, feline panting, especially if accompanied by other symptoms, such as coughing or shallow breathing (dyspnea), is considered to be abnormal, and should be treated as a medical emergency.[17] Reflexes[edit] Righting reflex[edit] Main article: Cat righting reflex Chronophotography of a falling cat by Étienne-Jules Marey, 1894 The righting reflex is the attempt of cats to land on their feet at the completion of a jump or a fall. They can do this more easily than other animals due to their flexible spine, floating collarbone, and loose skin. Cats also use vision and their vestibular apparatus to help tell which way to turn. They can then stretch themselves out and relax their muscles. The righting reflex does not always result in the cat landing on its feet.[18] Freeze reflex[edit] Adult cats are able to make use of pinch-induced behavioural inhibition to induce a "freeze reflex" in their young, which enables them to be transported by the neck without resisting. This reflex, also known as clipnosis,[19][20] can also be exhibited by adults. Eating patterns[edit] Cat eating "cat grass" Calico cat drinking water from a glass. Cats are obligate carnivores and do not do well on herbivore diets. In the wild they usually hunt smaller mammals to keep themselves nourished. Many cats find and chew small quantities of long grass, but this is not for its nutritional value per se. The eating of grass seems to stem from feline ancestry and has nothing to do with dietary requirements. It is believed that feline ancestors instead ate grass to purge intestinal parasites.[21] Cats have no sweet taste receptors on their tongue and thus cannot taste sweet things at all. Cats mainly smell for their food, and what they taste for is amino acids instead. This may be a cause of cats being diagnosed with diabetes. The food that domestic cats get has a lot of carbohydrates in it, and a high sugar content cannot be efficiently processed by the digestive system of cats.[22] Cats drink water by lapping the surface with their tongue. A fraction of a teaspoon of water is taken up with each lap. Although some desert cats are able to obtain much of their water needs through the flesh of their prey, most cats come to bodies of water to drink.[23] Eating patterns are another indicator to understand behavior changes in domestic cats. Changes in typical eating patterns can be an early signal for possible physical or psychological health problems. [24] A cat's eating pattern in a domestic setting is essential for the cat and owner bond to form. This happens because cats form attachments to households that regularly feed them.[25] Some cats ask for food dozens of times a day, including at night, with rubbing, pacing, meowing, or sometimes loud purring. Sleeping patterns[edit] More than half of cats sleep between 12 and 18 hours a day, sometimes even more. Most cats sleep more as they age. [26] This can explain why cats are crepuscular, mostly being active during the night.[27] Excretion[edit] Cats tend to bury their feces after defecating and can be attracted to a litter box if it has attractant in it. Cats will also generally defecate more in those litter boxes.[28] Socialization[edit] Socialization is defined as a member of a specific group learning to be part of that group.[29] It is said to be a continuous learning process that allows an individual to learn the necessary skills and behaviors required for a particular social position.[30] Cats, domestic or wild, do participate in social behaviors, even though it is thought that most cat species (besides lions) are solitary, anti-social animals.[31] Under certain circumstances, such as food availability, shelter, or protection, cats can be seen in groups.[31] The social behaviors that cats participate in are colony organization, social learning, socialization between cats, and socialization with humans. Colony organization[edit] Free-living domestic cats tend to form colonies.[32] Small colonies consist of one female, known as a queen, and her kittens. Large colonies consist of several queens and their kittens.[32] Male cats are present in both types of colonies and serve the purpose of reproduction and defending territory. Within these colonies altruistic behavior occurs. This means that if an expecting queen helps another queen that just gave birth, then the helping queen will get help in return when she gives birth.[32] Although free living cats are found in colonies, stable social order, like that of the lion, does not exist.[31] Free living cats usually are found in colonies for protection against predators, and for food availability.[31] Although there are many advantages of group living, such as easy access to mates, and defensive measures to protect food, there are also disadvantages, such as sexual competition for mates. If the group gets too big, fights may break out over food.[32] Social learning[edit] Cats are observational learners.[32][33] This type of learning emerges early in a cat's life,[34] and has been shown in many laboratory studies. Young kittens learn to hunt from their mothers by observing their techniques when catching prey.[32] The mother ensures that her kittens learn hunting techniques by first bringing dead prey to the litter, then live prey. She demonstrates the techniques required for successful capture to her kittens by bringing live prey to the litter for the kittens to catch themselves.[32] Prey-catching behavior of kittens improves over time when mothers are present .[35] Observational learning for cats can be described in terms of the drive to complete the behavior, the cue that initiates the behavior, the response to the cue, and the reward for completing the behavior.[34] This is shown when cats learn predatory behavior from their mothers. The drive is hunger, the cue is the prey, the response is to catch the prey, and the reward is to relieve the hunger sensation. Kittens also show observational learning when they are socializing with humans. They are more likely to initiate socialization with humans when their mothers are exhibiting non-aggressive and non-defensive behaviors.[32] Even though mothers spend most time with their kittens, male cats play an important role by breaking up fights among litter mates.[32] Observational learning is not limited to kittens. It can also be observed during adulthood. Studies have been done with adult cats performing a task, such as pressing a lever after a visual cue.[33] Adult cats that see others performing a task learn to perform the same task faster than those who did not witness another cat performing it.[33] Socialization between cats[edit] When strange cats meet, they ideally cautiously allow each other to smell their hindquarters, but this does not happen very often.[36] Usually when strange cats meet, one cat makes a sudden movement that puts the other cat into a defensive mode. The subordinate cat will then draw in on itself and prepare to attack if needed.[36] If an attack happens, the subordinate cat will usually run away, but this does not happen all the time and it could lead to a tomcat duel.[36] Dominance is also seen as an underlying factor for how conspecifics -- members of the same species -- interact with each other. Dominance can be seen among cats in multi-cat households. It can be seen when other cats submit to the dominant cat. Dominance includes such behaviors as the subordinate cat walking around the dominant cat, waiting for the dominant cat to walk past, avoiding eye contact, crouching, lying on its side (defensive posture), and retreating when the dominant cat approaches.[32] The dominant cat presents a specific body posture as well. Its ears are straight up, the base of its tail is arched, and it looks directly at the subordinate cat.[32] Dominant cats are usually not aggressive, but if a subordinate cat blocks food they may become aggressive.[37] When this aggressive behavior occurs, it can also lead to the dominant cat preventing subordinate cats from eating and using the litter box.[32] This can cause the subordinate cat to defecate somewhere else and create problems with human interaction.[32] Social conflicts[edit] Two cats fighting Social conflicts among cats depend solely on the behavior of the cats. Some research has shown that cats rarely pick fights, but when they do, it's usually for protecting food and/or litters, and defending territory.[37] The first sign of an imminent tomcat duel is when both cats draw themselves up high on their legs, all hair along the middle of their backs stands straight up, and they mew and howl loudly as they approach each other.[36] The steps the cats make become slower and shorter the closer they get to each other. Once they are close enough to attack, they pause slightly, and then one cat leaps and tries to bite the nape of the other cat.[36] The other cat has no choice but to retaliate, and both cats roll aggressively on the ground, with loud and intense screams by both.[36] After some time the cats separate and stand face to face to begin the attack all over again. This can go on for some time until one cat does not get up again and remains seated.[36] The defeated cat does not move until the victor has completed a sniff of the area and moves outside the fighting area. Once this happens, the defeated cat leaves the area, ending the duel.[36] Females may also fight with each other, and male-female fights can occur as well. Cats may need to be reintroduced or separated to avoid fights in a closed household. Socialization with humans[edit] Cats have learned how to develop their vocals in order to converse with humans, trying to tell humans what they want. One way cats and humans interact is through "head bunting," in which a cat rubs its head on a human in order to leave its scent to claim territory and create a bond.[38] Cats can sometimes take cues from human pointing and from the direction of human gazes. They can sometimes discriminate between, and sometimes even correlate, human facial expressions, attentional states, and voices. Besides its own name, a cat can sometimes learn the names of humans and other cats.[39] Cats age three to nine weeks are sensitive to human socialization;[40] after this period socialization can be less effective.[41] Studies have shown that the earlier a kitten is handled, the less fearful it will be toward humans.[41] Other factors that can enhance socialization are having many people handle the kitten frequently, the presence of the mother, and feeding.[40][41] The presence of the mother is important because cats are observational learners. If the mother is comfortable around humans, it can reduce anxiety in the kitten and promote the kitten-human relationship.[40][42] Feral kittens around two to seven weeks old can be socialized, usually within a month of capture.[43] Some species of cats cannot be socialized toward humans because of factors such as genetic influence and in some cases specific learning experiences.[43] The best way to get a kitten to socialize is to handle it for many hours a week.[43] The process is made easier if there is another socialized cat present but not necessarily in the same space as the feral cat. If the handler can get a cat to urinate in the litter tray, then the others in a litter will usually follow. Initial contact with thick gloves is highly recommended until trust is established, usually within the first week. Socializing an adult is challenging. Socialized adult feral cats tend to trust only those they trusted in their socialization period, and can be very fearful around strangers.[43] Cats can be companion animals. Studies have shown that these cats provide many physiological and psychological benefits for the owner.[41] Other aspects of cat behavior that are deemed advantageous for the human-cat bond are cat hygiene (cats are known for good hygiene)[44] and they do not have to be taken outside (use of the litter box). Cats are perfect for smaller spaces, and they have no problems with being left alone for extended periods.[41] Even though there are a number of benefits of owning a cat, there are a number of problematic behaviors that can affect the human-cat relationship. One behavior is when cats attack people by clawing and biting.[33] This often occurs spontaneously or is triggered by sudden movements.[33] Another problematic behavior is the "petting and biting syndrome," which involves the cat being petted and then suddenly attacking and running away.[33] Other problems are house soiling, scratching furniture, and when a cat brings dead prey into the house.[44] There are 52 measured personality traits in cats, with one study saying "five reliable personality factors were found using principal axis factor analysis: neuroticism, extroversion, dominance, impulsiveness and agreeableness."[45] Predatory behavior[edit] A domestic cat with its prey, a deer mouse Cats are natural predators. When allowed to roam outdoors, many cats will engage in predation on wildlife. Understanding an indoor cat's personality can go a long way toward satisfying their instincts and avoid potentially inconvenient behavior (such as sudden hissing, dashing around the house, or climbing the curtains). Environmental enrichment items include:[46] A good-sized cat tree, with scratching posts Toys that provide a release for their predatory instincts[47] A well kept litter box or toilet Fresh water and dry cat food Social interaction Environment[edit] Cats like to organize their environment based on their needs. Like their ancestors, domestic cats still have an inherent desire to maintain an independent territory but are generally content to live with other cats for company as they easily get bored. Living alone for a longer time may cause them to forget how to communicate with other cats.[48] Sometimes adding a kitten to a household can be a bad idea. If there already is an older cat present and another cat is added, it may be better to get another older cat that has been socialized with other cats. When a kitten is introduced to a mature cat, that cat may show feline asocial aggression, in which they feel threatened and act aggressive to drive off the intruder. If this happens, the kitten and the cat should be separated and slowly introduced by rubbing towels on the animals and presenting the towel to the other.[49] Cats use scent and pheromones to help organize their territory by marking prominent objects. If these objects or scents are removed, it upsets the cat's perception of its environment. See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cat behavior. Cat behaviorist Cat communication Cat play and toys Ethology Cat training References[edit] ^ Shipley, C; Buchwald, J.S; Carterette, E.C (January 1988). "The role of auditory feedback in the vocalizations of cats". Experimental Brain Research. 69 (2): 431–438. doi:10.1007/bf00247589. PMID 3345817. S2CID 31184802. ^ "Cats." Gale In Context Online Collection, Gale, 2018. Gale In Context: College, link.gale.com/apps/doc/LQLWOQ026686444/GPS?u=brookdalecc&sid=bookmark-GPS&xid=7afb5516. Accessed 10 Apr. 2023. ^ Kelley, JaneA (2017-06-05). "Scientists Discover New Meaning for Cat Chattering". Catster. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ "The Definitive Guide to Cat Behavior and Body Language". Tuft + Paw. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ Pachel, Christopher (May 2014). "Intercat Aggression: Restoring Harmony in the Home: A Guide for Practitioners". The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Small Animal Practice. 44 (3): 565–579. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2014.01.007. PMID 24766700. ^ Humphrey, Tasmin; Proops, Leanne; Forman, Jemma; Spooner, Rebecca; McComb, Karen (2020-10-05). "The role of cat eye narrowing movements in cat–human communication". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 16503. Bibcode:2020NatSR..1016503H. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-73426-0. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 7536207. PMID 33020542. ^ Dr. Jennifer Coates, DVM (22 April 2013). "Synthetic Feline Facial Pheromones: Making Recommendations in the Absence of Definitive Data, Part 1". petMD. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2014. ^ "Feliway". Archived from the original on 2015-05-02. Retrieved 2015-02-03. ^ "The Indoor Cat Initiative" (PDF). The Ohio State University, College of Veterinary Medicine. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-18. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ "Test to determine how well you know feline body language". Archived from the original on 2018-06-20. Retrieved 2016-09-12. ^ An Ethogram for Behavioral Studies of the Domestic Cat. UFAW Animal Welfare Research Report No 8. UK Cat Behavior Working Group, 1995. ^ "Reading Your Cat". Animal Planet. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2011. ^ Eckstein, Robert A.; Hart, Benjamin L. (2000). "Grooming and Control of Fleas in Cats". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 68 (2): 141–50. doi:10.1016/s0168-1591(00)00095-2. PMID 10771322. ^ Schwartz, Stefanie (June 2003). "Separation anxiety syndrome in dogs and cats". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 222 (11): 1526–32. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.222.1526. PMID 12784957. ^ McPherson, F.J; Chenoweth, P.J (April 2012). "Mammalian sexual dimorphism". Animal Reproduction Science. 131 (3–4): 109–122. doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.02.007. PMID 22482798. ^ Spielman, Dr. Bari. "Panting in Cats: Is It Normal?". Retrieved 2010-01-07. ^ "Cat Panting Explained". The Cat Health Guide. Retrieved 2011-07-02. ^ Adams, Cecil (1996-07-19). "Do cats always land unharmed on their feet, no matter how far they fall?". The Straight Dope. Chicago Reader. Retrieved 2007-11-07. ^ Robbie Gonzalez (22 November 2013). "The one myth about cats that's actually true". Gizmodo. Retrieved 21 May 2018. ^ Pozza, M. E.; Stella, J. L.; Chappuis-Gagnon, A. C.; Wagner, S. O.; Buffington, C. A. (2008). "Pinch-induced behavioral inhibition ('clipnosis') in domestic cats". Journal of Feline Medicine & Surgery. 10 (1): 82–7. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2007.10.008. PMID 18222719. S2CID 46156902. ^ Hart, Benjamin (December 2008). "Why do dogs and cats eat grass?". Veterinary Medicine. 103 (12): 648. ^ Li, Xia (July 2006). "Cats lack a sweet taste receptor". The Journal of Nutrition. 136 (7): 1932S–1934S. doi:10.1093/jn/136.7.1932s. PMC 2063449. PMID 16772462. ^ Macdonald, Rogers (1984). "Nutrition of the domestic cat, a mammalian carnivore". Annual Review of Nutrition. 4 (1): 521–562. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.4.1.521. PMID 6380542. ^ "What You Need To Do If Your Cat Not Eating Much But Acting Normal". Walk With Cat. 2019-09-26. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ Bradshaw, J. W. S., & Cook, S. E. (1996). Patterns of Pet Cat Behaviour at Feeding Occasions. Applied Animal Behavioral Science 47(1), 61-64. DOI: doi.org/10.1016/0168-1591(95)01011-4 ^ Izawa, Masako (1983). "Daily Activities of the Feral Cat Felis catus LINN.*". Retrieved 1 May 2023. ^ Piccione, Giuseppe; Marafioti, Simona; Giannetto, Claudia; Panzera, Michele; Fazio, Francesco (2013-07-01). "Daily rhythm of total activity pattern in domestic cats (Felis silvestris catus) maintained in two different housing conditions". Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 8 (4): 189–194. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2012.09.004. ISSN 1558-7878. ^ Frayne, Jennifer; Murray, Sarah Macdonald; Croney, Candace; Flickinger, Elizabeth; Edwards, Michelle; Shoveller, Anna Kate (2019). "The Behavioural Effects of Innovative Litter Developed to Attract Cats". Animals. 9 (9): 683. doi:10.3390/ani9090683. PMC 6770919. PMID 31540016. ^ "Socialization". Encyclopedia Britannica. October 18, 2018. ^ "Socialization". Dictionary.com. October 18, 2018. ^ a b c d Spotte, Stephen (2014). Free-Ranging Cats: Behaviour, Ecology, & Management. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. pp. 49–59. ISBN 978-1-118-88401-0. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Crowell-Davis, Sharon, L. (2007). "Cat Behaviour: Social Organization, Communication, & Development". The Welfare of Cats. Netherlands: Springer, Dordrecht. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ a b c d e f Bradshaw, John W. S. (1992). The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. Wallingford: CAB International. pp. 78, 198–200. ISBN 0-85198-715-X. ^ a b Alder, H.E. (1955). "Some Factors of Observational Learning". The Journal of Genetic Psychology. 86 (1): 159–177. doi:10.1080/00221325.1955.10532903. PMID 14354164. ProQuest 1297110751. ^ Caro, T. M. (1980). "Effects of the Mother, Object Play, and Adult Experience on Predation in Cats". Behavioral and Neural Biology. 29 (1): 29–51. doi:10.1016/S0163-1047(80)92456-5. PMID 7387584. ^ a b c d e f g h Leyhausen, Paul (1979). Cat Behaviour: The Predatory & Social Behaviour of Domestic & Wild Cats. New York, New York: Garland Publishing Inc. pp. 164–216, 227–231. ISBN 978-0-8240-7017-5. ^ a b Beadle, Muriel (1977). The Cat: History, Biology, and Behaviour. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 100–111. ISBN 978-0-671-22451-6. ^ "Bunting Behavior – Answers, Why, When & How of Cat Behavior Issues by Pam Johnson-Bennett". www.catbehaviorassociates.com. 2012-05-03. Retrieved 2018-12-03. ^ Takagi, Saho; Saito, Atsuko; Arahori, Minori; Chijiiwa, Hitomi; Koyasu, Hikari; Nagasawa, Miho; Kikusui, Takefumi; Fujita, Kazuo; Kuroshima, Hika (13 April 2022). "Cats learn the names of their friend cats in their daily lives". Scientific Reports. 12 (1): 6155. Bibcode:2022NatSR..12.6155T. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-10261-5. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 9007945. PMID 35418204. S2CID 248155872. ^ a b c Turner, Dennis C.; Bateson, Patrick (1988). The Domestic Cat: The Biology of its Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 112–113, 159–168. ISBN 978-0-521-35447-9. ^ a b c d e Bernstein, Penny L. (2007). "The Human-Cat Relationship". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 47–89. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ "Why Does My Cat Follow Me Everywhere In The House". Walk With Cat. 2019-10-03. Retrieved 2019-10-21. ^ a b c d Casey, Rachel; Bradshaw, John (November 2008). "The effects of additional socialisation for kittens in a rescue centre on their behaviour and suitability as a pet". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 114 (1–2): 196–205. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2008.01.003. ^ a b Heath, Sarah E. (2007). "Behaviour Problems and Welfare". The Welfare of Cats. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 91–107. ISBN 978-1-4020-3227-1. ^ Roetman, Philip; Kikillus, K. Heidy; Chiera, Belinda; Tindle, Hayley; Quinton, Gillian; Litchfield, Carla A. (2017-08-23). "The 'Feline Five': An exploration of personality in pet cats (Felis catus)". PLOS ONE. 12 (8): e0183455. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1283455L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0183455. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 5568325. PMID 28832622. ^ Herron, Meghan. "Environmental Enrichment for Indoor Cats" (PDF). Ohio State University. OSU. ^ "The Dangers of Strings, Ribbons, and Yarn for Cats". ^ "One Kitten or Two?". Archived from the original on 2018-06-21. Retrieved 2015-09-17. ^ Beaver, Bonnie (September 2004). "Fractious cats and feline aggression". Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 6 (1): 13–18. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2003.09.011. PMID 15123162. S2CID 525291. Bishko, Adriane. "What Your Cat's Body Language Is Saying". WebMD Pet. WebMD. Retrieved 1 December 2018. vteDomestic catsFelinology Anatomy Genetics Dwarf cat Kitten Odd-eyed cat Squitten Coat genetics Bicolor cat Black cat Calico cat Tabby cat Tortoiseshell cat Health Aging Declawing Diet dental health senior Vaccination Behavior Cat–dog relationship Catfight Catnip valerian Communication Meow Purr Kneading Intelligence Play and toys Righting reflex Senses Human–catinteraction Ailurophobia Cat cafés Cat killers Cat massage Cat meat Cat-scratch disease Cat show Cats in ancient Egypt Cultural depictions fictional Internet Feral cat Cats and Islam Lolcat National Cat Day Pet cat Puppy cat Working cat Bodega cat Farm cat Library cat Ship's cat Zoonosis Registries American Cat Fanciers Association Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana Canadian Cat Association Cat Aficionado Association Cat Fanciers' Association Fédération Internationale Féline Governing Council of the Cat Fancy New Zealand Cat Fancy Southern Africa Cat Council The International Cat Association World Cat Congress World Cat Federation Breeds(full list)(experimental)Fullydomestic Abyssinian American Curl American Shorthair Balinese Brazilian Shorthair British Shorthair Birman Bombay Burmese Burmilla California Spangled Chartreux Chinese Li Hua Colorpoint Shorthair Cornish Rex Cymric Devon Rex Donskoy Egyptian Mau European Shorthair Exotic Shorthair German Rex Himalayan Japanese Bobtail Javanese Khao Manee Korat Kurilian Bobtail Lykoi Maine Coon Manx Munchkin Neva Masquerade Norwegian Forest Ocicat Ojos Azules Oriental Shorthair Persian Peterbald Pixie-bob Ragdoll Ragamuffin Russian Blue Scottish Fold Selkirk Rex Siamese Siberian Singapura Snowshoe Somali Sphynx Thai Traditional Persian Tonkinese Toyger Turkish Angora Turkish Van Hybrid Bengal Chausie Highlander Savannah Serengeti Landraces Aegean Cyprus Domestic long-haired Domestic short-haired Kellas Sokoke Van Diseases anddisorders Acne Asthma Calicivirus Congenital sensorineural deafness Feline corneal sequestrum Flea Coccidia Heartworm Hepatic lipidosis Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Immunodeficiency virus Infectious peritonitis Leukemia virus Lower urinary tract disease Panleukopenia Giardiasis Polydactyly Rabies Ringworm Tritrichomonas foetus Roundworm Skin disorders Tick Toxoplasmosis Viral rhinotracheitis Cats by country Australia Canada Japan New Zealand United Kingdom United States Related List of individual cats List of oldest cats Cats in folklore Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cat_behavior&oldid=1177443160" Categories: Cat behaviorAnimal communicationEthologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from October 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from July 2012All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesCommons category link is on WikidataArticles containing video clips This page was last edited on 27 September 2023, at 16:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width 

Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search Login Subscribe Subscribe Home Quizzes & Games History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Companions Demystified Image Galleries Infographics Lists Podcasts Spotlights Summaries The Forum Top Questions #WTFact 100 Women Britannica Kids Saving Earth Space Next 50 Student Center Home Quizzes & Games History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos cat Table of Contents cat Table of Contents Introduction & Top QuestionsOrigin and history of catsDomesticationAssociations with human cultureGeneral features and special adaptationsCoordination and musculatureTeethClawsSensesBehaviourSpecial traitsBehavioral problemsOther traitsCats as petsNutritionReproductionDiseases and parasitesGeneticsColourOther charactersBreedsList of selected shorthair breedsList of selected longhair breeds References & Edit History Related Topics Images & Videos For Students domestic cat summary Quizzes Animal Factoids Know Your Mammals Quiz Weird Animals Quiz All About Pets Quiz Ultimate Animals Quiz Related Questions What is the lineage of cats? When do dogs need shots? What is a dog? Why do dogs bark? Why do dogs sniff other dogs’ rear ends? Read Next Do Cats Cause Schizophrenia? 6 Domestic Animals and Their Wild Ancestors Vikings Helped Cats Conquer the World Working Like a Dog: 7 Animals with Jobs Abundant Animals: The Most Numerous Organisms in the World Discover 9 of the World’s Deadliest Snakes The Death of Shakespeare What State Is Washington, D.C. In? 9 of the World’s Deepest Lakes 11 Egyptian Gods and Goddesses A Brief (and Fascinating) History of Money 12 Novels Considered the “Greatest Book Ever Written” Home Science Mammals Cats & the Feline Family Behaviour Special traits groomingThe cat has a subtle repertoire of facial expressions, vocal sounds, and tail and body postures that express its emotional state and intentions. These various signals serve to increase, decrease, or maintain social distance. One distinctive social behaviour involves rubbing the side of the head, lips, chin, or tail against the owner and against furniture. These regions of the cat’s body contain scent glands that seem to play a role in establishing a familiar odour in the cat’s environment. The tongue of all cats, which has a patch of sharp, backward-directed spines called filiform papillae near the tip, has the appearance and feel of a coarse file; the spines help the cat to groom itself. The disposition to cleanliness is well established in cats, and they groom themselves at length, especially after meals. Learn why only domestic cats purr and not other felinesSee all videos for this articleWhile lions and other big cats roar, domestic cats and other Felis species purr. Purring has been described as a low, continuous, rattling hum and often is interpreted as an expression of pleasure or contentment. Purring also occurs in cats that are injured and in pain, however, so that this vocalization can be seen as the cat’s “mantra”—that is, as a relaxing, self-comforting sound and a friendly mood-conveying signal. Behavioral problems Under conditions of domestication, the cat is subject to a variety of factors that result in behaviour indicative of emotional distress and difficulty in adapting to the home environment. Some behaviours are not abnormal but are difficult for owners to accept. Britannica Quiz All About Pets Quiz The most common behaviour problem in companion cats is that they sometimes urinate and defecate outside the litter box in the house. Organic causes include feline urologic syndrome (urinary bladder inflammation and calculi, or stones, in the urinary tract), blocked or impacted anal glands, and constipation. Emotional causes include the addition of a new family member—another cat, a child, or a spouse. Such changes may make the cat feel insecure, so that it deposits urine and feces around the house, possibly as territorial marks for security. Cats are creatures of habit, and any change in the family structure or in daily routines—resulting, for example, from a move or even from rearranging furniture—can be stressful. Another common behaviour problem in cats is their natural desire to rake objects such as drapes and furniture with their claws. Surgical removal of the front claws to prevent property damage is normally repugnant to cat lovers. Cats can be trained to use carpeted scratching posts in the house to satisfy this behavioral need, which may be a combination of claw cleaning and sharpening and of territorial marking. Many cats engage in social licking and in the grooming of their feline and human companions, which is a natural display of affection and dependence. Some also engage in nursing behaviour, sucking on people’s fingers and earlobes, on their own paws and tails, and on blankets and woolen clothing. Nursing may be a cat’s way of regressing and relaxing into kittenish behaviour. It is often more intense in cats weaned too early or in those malnourished in kittenhood. For various emotional reasons some cats may groom themselves to the point of self-mutilation or become compulsive wool suckers and eaters. Pica—a hunger for nonnutritive substances—may be a symptom of the need for more roughage in the diet or of feline leukemia or other health problems. As with the dog, excessive eating and drinking is frequently associated with endocrine diseases such as diabetes and thyroid dysfunction. Cats often vomit soon after eating, which is most often caused by the accumulation of fur balls in the stomach, although a food allergy, feline leukemia, or other organic cause may be involved. Active and healthy cats often race through the house as though they were crazed. These “evening crazies” (which can also erupt early in the morning) result from the cat’s ancient rhythm of actively hunting around dawn and dusk. In the domestic environment, this normal, instinctive behaviour often still occurs, to the consternation of some owners who fear that their cat may have rabies, a brain tumour, or an unstable personality. Changes in animals’ behaviour should not, therefore, be dismissed as psychological (or as simple disobedience, as when a cat suddenly becomes unhousebroken, for example), since there may be an underlying physical cause. Nevertheless, abnormal behaviour in animals often does have a nonphysical, psychological, or emotional origin, which should always be considered in the diagnosis and treatment of the ailments of companion animals. Other traits The cat’s sleep patterns are different from those of dogs and humans. Dogs and humans have long periods of REM (rapid eye movement) sleep, the stage that is associated with dreaming. In contrast, the cat rarely lapses into REM sleep. Instead, it has a lighter, episodic sleep pattern that enables it to rest but to be instantly alert. When sick, cats have a tendency to withdraw and become inactive, which helps them conserve energy. A sick cat may seem lifeless but recover after a few days of withdrawal, which is one reason cats are said to have nine lives. (A sick cat should always be taken to a veterinarian, however; it is negligent simply to let nature take its course.) Cats are known to have traveled hundreds of miles to find their owners in new homes to which they themselves have never been. Dogs have also performed such feats of so-called psi (psychic) trailing. Scientists have not been able to find a physiological or psychological explanation for this ability. 

AboutPressCopyrightContact usCreatorAdvertiseDevelopersTermsPrivacyPolicy & SafetyHow YouTube worksTest new features© 2023 Google LLC 

Skip to Main Content Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Menu Find a pet Main menuFind a pet Find a pet Rehome a pet Rehome a pet How to rehome Rehome a horse Rehome a horse How to rehome a horse Foster an animal Foster an animal Horse fostering Advice for adopters Advice for adopters Advice and welfare Main menuAdvice and welfare Advice and welfare Pets Pets Dogs Cats Rabbits Horses Rodents Ferrets Exotic pets Ornamental Fish General Giving up a pet Pet bereavement Find or call a vet Pet theft Brachycephalic animals Lost and found Lab animals Lab animals Phasing out Are animal experiments necessary? Testing chemicals Medicines and vaccines Replacing research animals Reducing research animal suffering Primates and research Biotechnology Farm animals Farm animals Farm animals as pets Slaughter On-farm Live transport Pigs Laying hens Sheep Farmed fish Meat chickens Ducks Dairy cows Beef cattle Turkeys Farmed rabbits Foie Gras Worried about a farm animal? Bovine TB Litter Litter Fishing litter Alternatives to balloons and sky lanterns Single use plastics Sky lanterns Seasonal advice Seasonal advice Spring Summer Autumn Winter Floods Pets at Christmas Diseases Diseases Alabama rot Performing animals Performing animals Guidelines Report concerns FAQs The cost-of-living crisis The cost-of-living crisis Pet cost calculator Food bank Food bank donation point Dog behaviour care costs Wildlife friendly gardening Wildlife friendly gardening The RSPCA wildlife garden Wildlife Wildlife Foxes Squirrels Hedgehogs Otters Seals Bats Rats and mice Rabbits and Hares Find a wildlife rescue centre Wildlife deterrents Injured wild animals Badgers Snakes Deer Wildlife in captivity Wildlife laws Get involved Main menuGet involved Get involved Volunteer Volunteer What can I do? What's it like to volunteer with us? Volunteers' week Big Help Out Campaign Campaign Puppy trade Stun before slaughter Primates as pets Sentient beings Circuses Sanctuaries Farm Animals Better chicken Tougher sentencing Make Wales kinder for animals I'm a Celebrity Stop live exports Animal rehoming Fur Free Britain Gene editing Pets as prizes End the cage age Lab animal regulations Save our breath Join our campaign network Achievements Phase Out Lab Animals Fireworks Slaughterhouses Rabbit breeding End Sky Litter Ear cropping Vapes Better labels better choices End Breed Specific Legislation Act now for animals Donate Donate Leaving a legacy Current appeals Donate in memory Advice for donors Payroll Giving Unwanted items Gift Aid Sponsorship Philanthropy Win Win Raffle Lottery Fundraise Fundraise Virtual challenges At school Animal Hero Running Trekking Cycling Training hub Own place in an event Ideas and resources Fundraising pack Pay in your offline fundraising Swimming My Big Walkies #50MilesForAnimals Young people Young people Subscription Renewal Buttercup Farm 30DaysForAnimals Membership Membership Membership policy statement Events Events Local events One Fun Day Christmas Concert Howloween Great British Spring Clean Businesses Businesses Become a partner Our corporate partners Other ways companies can support What we do Main menuWhat we do What we do Strategy to 2030 Strategy to 2030 Getting justice for animals Ambitions End cruelty End cruelty Investigate cruelty Rescue animals Prevent suffering Prosecution Change the law Work internationally Care for animals Care for animals Rehabilitation Release Our wildlife centres Veterinary care Home for Life Financial assistance Education Education Children in school Young offenders At home Latest Latest News Our blog Publications The Dog Rescuers Jo Brand's Kitten Rescue Media contacts Adoptober RSPCA 2022 essay collection Animal Kindness Index 2022 Wilberforce Lecture Facts, figures and myths Who we are Who we are Governance Our branches Our executives High profile supporters Our history How we work How we work Our mission Policies RSPCA's rules Shop Main menuShop Shop Pet friendly holidays Pet friendly holidays Shop and donate Shop and donate Pet insurance Pet insurance Cat insurance Dog insurance Rabbit insurance Multi-pet insurance Product information FAQs Make a claim My RSPCA Main menu My RSPCA My account My account My pets My pets Sign in Sign in Your local RSPCA Your local RSPCA Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Share this... Get more animal welfare advice Sign up to receive our emails today. Get more pet care advice, hints and tips on helping wildlife, our latest news, rehoming success stories and more directly to your inbox. Sign up to emails today What does my cat's body language mean? Use our guide to help you understand how your cat is feeling Should I spay or neuter my cat? Make life easier and protect your kitten - get them done. The social needs of cats Find out more about the social needs of cats Environment Diet Behaviour Understanding cat behaviour Company Health and welfare Kittens Hidden How we help In 2022 we investigated and closed 63,563 complaints of animal cruelty Get in touch Find your local RSPCA Contact us Report cruelty Our charity Media centre Science RSPCA Assured Education Follow us Or sign up for email updates © RSPCA 2023. All rights reserved. The RSPCA helps animals in England and Wales. Registered charity no.219099. Terms and conditions Site map National privacy notice Accessibility Modern slavery Contact us Jobs 

Skip navigation Free Quote Pet Insurance Back Pet Insurance Pet Insurance Our Plans Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Puppy Insurance Kitten Insurance Plans What's Covered Accident-Only Coverage Preventive Care Coverage Behavioral Coverage Pre-existing Conditions Dental Coverage How It Works Back How It Works How Pet Insurance Works Pet Insurance Basics & Common Questions How Claims & Reimbursement Work Why Us Back Why Us Why Choose Us Compare Our Coverage Our Advantages Reviews About Us Resources Back Resources Pet Parent Resources View All Resources Insurance Pet Health Pet Care Pet Lifestyle Learn About Breeds Other Behavior Issues Car Safety Login Underwriting Policy Terms Contact Us Submit a Claim Underwriting Policy Terms Contact Us Submit a Claim Login Pet Insurance Pet Insurance Our Plans Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Puppy Insurance Kitten Insurance Plans What's Covered Accident-Only Coverage Preventive Care Coverage Behavioral Coverage Pre-existing Conditions Dental Coverage How It Works How Pet Insurance Works Pet Insurance Basics & Common Questions How Claims & Reimbursement Work Why Us Why Choose Us Compare Our Coverage Our Advantages Reviews About Us Resources Pet Parent Resources View All Resources Insurance Pet Health Pet Care Pet Lifestyle Learn About Breeds Other Behavior Issues Car Safety Free Quote Pet Parent Resources 14 Weird Cat Behaviors Explained 14 Weird Cat Behaviors Explained Post by: Dr. Wendy Hauser (opens new window) Cats make wonderful companions, but they can be curious critters. They like to bump their heads against us, sleep in tight boxes, knead our laps, and engage in all sorts of weird behaviors. What do these behaviors mean and when should you seek help from your veterinarian? 1. Bouncing Off the Walls Cats and especially kittens can be very playful and energetic. Sometimes they expel all that energy by darting from room to room, jumping up and down on the furniture, and going a little crazy. This kind of behavior can also be a reaction to catnip, which can make cats act goofy for short periods of time. All that vigorous activity is normal, but it can lead to injuries. It’s helpful to look around your house and make sure your cat’s area is as safe as possible. For instance, put away things that could get knocked over and keep windows closed. Cats who fall out of windows can suffer from high-rise syndrome, which are injuries that can include: a broken jaw, fractured ribs, and other issues. If this behavior is disrupting your household, you should find ways to help channel your cat’s energy. Make time to play games like chase to wear them out and provide them with interactive toys they can enjoy on their own. If you’re at your wit’s end, talk with your veterinarian. 2. Head Bumping When your cat bop, bop, bops you with their head, they’re saying, “I love you!” They’re also letting everyone know that you belong to them. Cats have pheromones in their cheek areas that mark you as their possession. But don’t worry if your cat doesn’t headbutt you. There are lots of other ways cats show their love. 3. Chattering Ever hear your cat chattering while watching the birds flying around the yard? That sound comes from their excitement at seeing potential prey combined with the frustration of not being able to get at them. Cats can also make other weird noises like chirping, yowling, and hacking. 4. Chewing Weird Things Some cats chew on odd things, like wool blankets, socks, plastic bags, or rubber bands. This behavior can be due to boredom, anxiety, or illness. It can also occur in cats who were weaned too early and feel the urge to “nurse” on soft items, like stuffed animals or blankets. This habit is dangerous since it can cause choking, intestinal blockages, and other problems. If your cat is chewing on inedible things, you should visit your veterinarian to figure out the cause and best course of treatment. If your cat swallows an object, an ASPCA Pet Health Insurance plan can help you cover the costs of care. Get a quote now. 5. Napping in Tight Places Cats love to slip into small spaces like boxes, dresser drawers, bathroom cabinets, or closet corners where they feel cozy and secure. They may even prefer these places to a comfy pet bed. This behavior can be traced back to their wildcat ancestors who would sleep safely hidden away to help avoid predators. 6. Giving Gifts Cats are infamous for leaving us unwanted gifts, such as dead mice or birds. This is actually their way of thanking us for all we do for them. While you should feel honored your cat wanted to share their spoils with you, you should avoid making a big deal about it. Don’t scold your cat for this normal behavior and certainly don’t praise them or you could end up with more gifts. While it won’t stop your cat from finding mice or other wildlife that get indoors, you can help prevent gift giving by keeping your cat inside at all times as recommended by our strategic partner the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals® (ASPCA®). This also protects your cat from contagious diseases and parasites. 7. Ignoring You If your cat’s ignoring you, it’s probably not because of anything you did. Our notoriously independent cats need a little time to themselves now and then. It’s a good idea to leave your cat alone when they are acting this way. Don’t worry—they’ll come seek you out for some attention when they want it. 8. Kneading Why do cats knead things with their paws? It may go back to their kitten days when they would press on their mommy’s tummy to stimulate milk flow. They might also do it simply because they’re feeling relaxed and content. Kneading shouldn’t be a problem unless your cat’s claws are digging into your thighs. In this case, it might be time to get out the nail clippers and safely trim them down. 9. Knocking Things Over It can be startling and frustrating when your cat shoves a book off your nightstand or pushes over a framed picture, but this is normal behavior. Cats have sensitive paws and like to swat things around to check them out. This is something they do with their prey too. Cats also knock things down to get our attention. It is best to ignore your cat when they are engaging in this activity, or you might reinforce the behavior. You should also put valuable or breakable objects out of paw’s reach. Have a dog at home? Check out these tips on managing common dog behavior problems. 10. Nibbling on Plants Cats nibble on plants for lots of different reasons. It might be because their tummy is upset, they find it comforting, they are curious, or they want to get your attention. Of course, this can be a problem if they chew on harmful plants, like lilies or daffodils. If you want to have plants in your home, make sure they are safe for cats. You should also be careful where you place them. Cats can knock over potted plants, which can result in injuries as well as a big mess. In addition, potting soil can contain parasite eggs. Keep cats out of the soil or ask your gardening store about sterilized soil. 11. Pooping Outside the Box It’s not pleasant when a cat starts going outside of the litter box. If this is happening in your home, you should try to figure out the cause. Make sure the litter box is clean, easily accessible, and in a semi-private space. You should also have an adequate number of litter boxes, which is one per cat plus an additional one. So, if you have two cats, you should have three litter boxes. You can try out a variety of boxes (covered, uncovered, different heights) to see what your cat prefers. If you have older cats, they might have trouble going up and down the stairs or getting into litter boxes with high sides. Try placing a litter box on the floor where your cat lives and purchase one they can get in and out of easily. Litter box issues can also be caused by illnesses, such as a urinary tract infection. If you suspect a medical issue or if you’re having trouble solving the problem, you should talk with your veterinarian. Get the scoop on cat poop, including more tips on keeping your cat from going outside the box. 12. Sipping from the Faucet Some cats like to drink water straight from the tap. They’ll jump up into the sink and wait for you to switch on the faucet. This behavior might come from their wildcat ancestors. In the great outdoors, it is safer to drink running water rather than from a stagnant source, which is more likely to contain bacteria and other contaminants. If you don’t mind your cat taking an occasional sip from the faucet, you don’t need to worry. However, if they become too needy with their requests to turn on the faucet, you can try setting up a pet fountain that runs continuously for them to enjoy. 13. Sleeping on Your Laptop With so many soft and comfy places to rest, why does your cat plunk down on your hard laptop? It could be because it is nice and warm after you’ve used it for awhile. Or maybe they’ve figured out this is a good way to get your attention. Cats can be very clever! 14. Staying Up All Night Some cats seem to sleep all day and play all night. This might be because they don’t have enough to do during the day. It can also be a habit they retained from their ancestors who liked to hunt in low light to take advantage of their keen eyesight. While this behavior is normal, it can be disruptive to everyone else who is trying to get a good night’s sleep. If your cat is too active at night, make sure they have interactive toys to play with during the day. Rotate their toys to keep them new and exciting. You can also offer your cat a small meal before bedtime to help make them sleepy. If your cat is very vocal or sounds like they are in pain at night, you should visit your veterinarian. Getting Help for Your Cat While some weird cat behaviors are silly or endearing, others that like staying up all night or going outside the litter box can be problematic. While there are things you can do to try to address common behavior issues at home, you should talk to your veterinarian if you have any questions or concerns. Remember that diagnosis and treatment for behavioral conditions can be covered if you have an ASPCA Pet Health Insurance plan. Get a quote now. RELATED ARTICLES Weird Noises Pets Make, and What They Mean Snort! Cough! Chirp! Honk! Why on earth do our pets make these kinds of sounds and what do they mean? READ MORE > Microchipping and Lost Pet Prevention A microchip can make a big difference in recovering a lost pet. Learn about the benefits and take our poll. READ MORE > What Is My Pet Trying to Say? Pets can’t talk to us, but they have other ways of communicating. READ MORE > Find Articles Pet Parent Resources Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Browse Categories Health Lifestyle Insurance Care Cat Breeds Dog Breeds mainImage: https://www.aspcapetinsurance.com/media/2478/14-weird-cat-behaviors-explained.jpg title: 14 Weird Cat Behaviors Explained url: /resources/14-weird-cat-behaviors-explained/ author: Dr. Wendy Hauser category Care Sub category Cat Pet Insurance Our Plans Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Free Quote About Us Contact Us Our Company Careers Reviews Media Center Partners Veterinarians Employers Associations Benefit Brokers Members Mobile App Submit a Claim Customer Login Top Questions Resources Pet Dangers Vet Finder Compare Resource Center More Info Underwriting Privacy Policy Licensing Web Accessibility Mobile T&Cs Site Map Get a free quote to cover your four-legged family. Error: please correct the following issues Pet's name cannot be blank. Pet's name must only be letters and numbers. Your Pet's Name Go! Get Social With Us Pet Insurance Get a Quote Research & Compare About Us Veterinarians Groups Customer Login My Pet Insurance App Web Accessibility Site Map (opens new window) Notice to California Residents Notice to Maine Residents **Pre-existing conditions are not covered. Waiting periods, annual deductible, co-insurance, benefit limits and exclusions may apply. For all terms and conditions visit www.aspcapetinsurance.com/terms. Preventive Care coverage reimbursements are based on a schedule. Complete Coverage℠ reimbursements are based on the invoice. Products, schedules, and rates may vary and are subject to change. Discounts may vary and are subject to change. More information available at checkout. Insurance products are underwritten by either Independence American Insurance Company (NAIC #26581. A Delaware insurance company located at 11333 N. Scottsdale Rd, Ste. 160, Scottsdale, AZ 85254), or United States Fire Insurance Company (NAIC #21113. Morristown, NJ). Please refer to your policy forms to determine the underwriter for your policy. Insurance is produced by PTZ Insurance Agency, Ltd. (NPN: 5328528. Domiciled in Illinois with offices at 1208 Massillon Road, Suite G200, Akron, Ohio 44306). (California residents only: PTZ Insurance Agency, Ltd., d.b.a PIA Insurance Agency, Ltd. CA license #0E36937). The ASPCA® is not an insurer and is not engaged in the business of insurance. Through a licensing agreement, the ASPCA receives a royalty fee that is in exchange for use of the ASPCA’s marks and is not a charitable contribution. © Copyright 2023, PTZ Insurance Agency, Ltd. ASPCA Logo, © Copyright 2023, ASPCA. All Rights Reserved 

Skip to main content Search n i direct Main navigation Home News Contacts Help Twitter Facebook YouTube RSS Welfare of cats: normal behaviour patterns The way a cat behaves is individual and depends on its age, breed or type and past experience. Most cats are playful, sociable animals and they enjoy playing together with toys, people and other cats. Changes in behaviour may suggest that something is wrong with a cat's health. What your cat needsHow a cat behaves depends on its age, personality and past experiences.Most cats are playful animals and enjoy socialising with people. Cats like to play with toys and those that do not go outside often play at hunting indoors. Some cats, especially those that live outdoors, may be less sociable with people and other animals.Cats sleep for many hours each day. When they are awake they need opportunities to exercise and play. Additionally, all cats need a suitable scratching place, high enough to allow them to stretch out fully, to mark their territory and condition their claws.Any change in behaviour may suggest that your cat is distressed and needs help.Scratching or 'claw conditioning' is part of normal cat behaviour. Cats condition their claws for various reasons, and regular scratching removes the frayed and worn outer claws, exposing the new and sharper claws growing underneath. It also exercises and strengthens the muscles used when the claws move in and out of the paw, which is essential for a cat's normal behaviour of climbing and catching prey.What your cat needs to behave normallyYou should:make sure your cat receives enough mental, social and physical stimulation to satisfy its individual behavioural needsprovide your cat with safe toys and regular opportunities to play with friendly people and by itselfmake sure that your cat can rest undisturbed when it wants tomake sure your cat has opportunities to exercise each day to stay fit, happy and healthyprovide suitable indoor activities to keep your cat active, if it does not go outsidetake advice from a vet or other suitably qualified cat care specialist. if you are unsure how much exercise your cat needsmake sure that your cat can reach all the things that it needs (for example bed, food, water, litter or outdoors) without having to get too close to things, people or other animals that may scare itknow how your cat behaves when fit, happy and healthyseek advice from a vet or other suitably qualified cat care specialist if its behaviour changes or becomes a problem it could be distressed, bored, ill or injurednever shout at, or punish, your cat - it will not understand and will just become more nervous or scaredonly use positive reward-based training, and avoid harsh, potentially painful, training methodsmake sure children allow cats to exhibit normal behaviours More useful links Cats Search for a veterinary practice Animal welfare and pets Share this page Share on Facebook (external link opens in a new window / tab) Share on Twitter (external link opens in a new window / tab) Share by email (external link opens in a new window / tab) Cats Welfare of cats: an introductionWelfare of cats: getting on with other animalsWelfare of cats: normal behaviour patternsWelfare of cats: protection from pain and diseaseWelfare of cats: the need for a suitable dietWelfare of cats: the need for a suitable environment Translation help How to translate this page Help improve this page - send your feedback You must have JavaScript enabled to use this form. What do you want to do? report a problem leave feedback ask a question Report a problem Which problem did you find on this page? (Tick all that apply) A link, button or video is not working There is a spelling mistake Information is missing, outdated or wrong I can't find what I'm looking for Another issue Messages You will not receive a reply. We will consider your feedback to help improve the site. Don't include any personal or financial information, for example National Insurance, credit card numbers, or phone numbers. Tell us more about the problem you're having with the nidirect website. Enter your feedback What is your question about? Choose a topic for your question: - Select -AnglingBenefitsBirth certificatesBlue BadgeCareersCompensation due to a road problemChild MaintenanceCivil partnership certificatesCoronavirus (COVID-19)COVID vaccination certificateCriminal record checks (AccessNI)Death certificatesEducational Maintenance AllowanceEmployment rightsHigh Street Spend Local SchemeMarriage certificatesMotoringnidirect accountPassportsPenalty Charge NoticesPensionsPRONI - historical recordsRates or property valuationProblems with roads and streetsSmartpassMy question is about something else What to do next Comments or queries about angling can be emailed to anglingcorrespondence@daera-ni.gov.uk If you have a comment or query about benefits, you will need to contact the government department or agency which handles that benefit. Contacts for common benefits are listed below. Carer's Allowance Call 0800 587 0912 Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk Discretionary support / Short-term benefit advance Call 0800 587 2750 Email customerservice.unit@communities-ni.gov.uk Disability Living Allowance Call 0800 587 0912 Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk Employment and Support Allowance Call 0800 587 1377 Jobseeker’s Allowance Contact your local Jobs & Benefits office Personal Independence Payment Call 0800 587 0932 If your query is about another benefit, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. Comments or queries about the Blue Badge scheme can be emailed to bluebadges@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk or you can also call 0300 200 7818. For queries or advice about careers, contact the Careers Service. For queries or advice about Child Maintenance, contact the Child Maintenance Service. For queries or advice about claiming compensation due to a road problem, contact DFI Roads claim unit. If you can’t find the information you’re looking for in the Coronavirus (COVID-19) section, then for queries about: Restrictions or regulations — contact the Department of Health Travel advice (including self-isolation) — contact the Department of Health Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccinations — contact the Department of Health or Public Health Agency If your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk and for queries about your certificate, email covidcertni@hscni.net. For queries or advice about criminal record checks, email ani@accessni.gov.uk Application and payment queries can be emailed to ema_ni@slc.co.uk For queries or advice about employment rights, contact the Labour Relations Agency. For queries or advice about birth, death, marriage and civil partnership certificates and research, contact the General Register Office Northern Ireland (GRONI) by email gro_nisra@finance-ni.gov.uk For queries about the High Street Spend Local Scheme, email HSSS.mail@economy-ni.gov.uk. For queries about:Car tax, vehicle registration and SORNcontact the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA), Swansea Driver licensing and tests, MOT and vehicle testingcontact the Driver & Vehicle Agency (DVA), Northern IrelandIf your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above. For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk. For queries or advice about passports, contact HM Passport Office. For queries or advice about Penalty Charge Notices (PCNs), including parking tickets and bus lane PCNs, email dcu@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk For queries or advice about pensions, contact the Northern Ireland Pension Centre. If you wish to report a problem with a road or street you can do so online in this section.If you wish to check on a problem or fault you have already reported, contact DfI Roads. For queries or advice about historical, social or cultural records relating to Northern Ireland, use the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI) enquiry service. For queries or advice about rates, email LPSCustomerTeam@lpsni.gov.uk For queries or advice about 60+ and Senior Citizen SmartPasses (which can be used to get concessionary travel on public transport), contact Smartpass - Translink. If you have a question about a government service or policy, you should contact the relevant government organisation directly. We don't have access to information about you. Extra comments (optional) Related sites gov.uk nibusinessinfo.co.uk Links to supporting information Accessibility statement Crown copyright Terms and conditions Privacy Cookies Twitter Facebook YouTube RSS 

Understanding Cat Behavior | PAWS Chicago Facebook Twitter Instagram Sign up Shop Home Our WorkHow To HelpEvents & Dog TrainingNews & ResourcesNo Kill MissionAbout Us Pet AdoptionPets AvailableAdopt a CatAdopt a DogAdoption ProcessWhy AdoptAdoption CentersAdoption EventsA Pet's Journey Through PAWSOngoing Training & SupportRecently Adopted PetsPAWS AlumniSpay/NeuterLifesaving ImpactBenefits of Spay/NeuterSpay/Neuter ServicesLurie ClinicFeral Cats (TNR)Importance of Early Spay/NeuterCommunity EngagementPAWS for Life OutreachMobile Vet ClinicCommunity CatsPAWS Chicago MagazineCrisis SupportGiving Up Your PetCrisis Foster CareDisaster ResponseMedical Center VolunteerBecome a VolunteerVolunteer OpportunitiesJunior VolunteersVolunteers of the MonthVolunteers of the YearDonateYour Giving Saves LivesLifeline Monthly Giving ProgramTributes and MemorialsCorporate GivingGuardian AngelOther Ways to GiveCreate Your Own (CYO) Fundraiser ProgramFosterBecome a FosterResources for FostersFind the Right Foster Pet for YouPets Available for Fostering Fundraising EventsAnimal MagnetismBeach PartyGolfTEAM PAWS ChicagoPAWS 5KFur BallDesktop CalendarCommunity EventsPet Loss HEAL Support Group2nd Saturday Youth ToursDog Training ClassesMeet the TrainersTraining Center FAQs News & FeaturesPAWS Chicago NewsAnimal WelfareFor Your PetPAWS Chicago MagazineFor People Who Love PetsAll About DogsDoggy BasicsGetting Started - A Guide for Bringing Home a New DogPreparing Your Dog for a Change in the FamilyUnderstanding Dog BehaviorMedical Care for Your DogProviding for Your Dog Should Something Happen To YouHow Dogs AgeProtocolsReturn to RoutineAll About CatsKitty BasicsGetting Started - A Guide for Bringing Home a New CatPreparing Your Cat for a Change in the FamilyUnderstanding Cat BehaviorMedical Care for Your CatProviding for Your Cat Should Something Happen To YouCat ResourcesTwo is Better than OneResourcesChicago Area Animal SheltersVet Care PartnersFinding Your Lost PetHelping a Stray or Lost AnimalCoping with Pet LossHazardous Items for Pets About No KillHistory of ShelteringThe No Kill RevolutionDefining No KillNo Kill Gold StandardThe No Kill ModelThe Foundation - Community EngagementThe Four PillarsA Model No Kill CommunityBuilding a No Kill ChicagoCommunity Results to DateAnimal Care & Control ResultsPAWS Chicago's ProgressionNo Kill Policy Recommendations The StoryOur HistoryTimelines & MilestonesMission & ValuesWatch Our StoryResultsAdoption ProgramSpay/Neuter DataCommunity EngagementFinancial Health and SustainabilityLeadershipBoard of DirectorsDevelopment BoardProfessional BoardMedia CenterPAWS in the MediaMedia ArchiveVideo Archive Close Menu Menu DONATE ADOPT Home Page News & Resources All About Cats Understanding Cat Behavior Understanding Cat Behavior A key step in developing a strong relationship with your feline friend. Cats become confident, motivated members of their household when they feel confident in their ownership of their territory and they feel like they have a job to do in that territory A confident cat is proactive, while an unconfident cat is reactive. Confident cats have objectives and tasks to complete, while unconfident cats simply react to things happening around them. Each cat is unique, but a cat’s behavior typically falls into one of three categories: The Mojito Cat (the Hostest with the Mostest) The confident owner of territory. This is the cat that walks into a room, chest held high, tail in the air, with a relaxed posture. He comes right up to you, gives you a little head butt, weaves in and out of your legs and gives you sweet eyes. He’s a picture of territorial confidence. He is owning his territory actively, confidently and in a relaxed way. His confidence comes from knowing everything he has is safely his. The Napoleon Cat (the Overowner) When you encounter this guy, his ears are forward; he’s glaring at you with eyes zeroed in just a little; and he’s crouching down in an offensive, sometimes even aggressive posture. He’s thinking, “Who are you, and what are you here to steal?” He may even lie across the doorway to ensure you’ve got to step over him. Sometimes he urinates on things because he doesn’t trust his ownership of the territory—he needs to mark it. Anyone who doesn’t confidently own his territory overowns it. Overowning is reactive, not active. The Wallflower Cat (the Disappearing Act) This is the cat hanging back against the wall, never walking across the middle of the floor. He is saying, “I don’t own this. You must be the owner. Okay, fine, I’m not looking at you, I’m just going to the litter box over there. I’m just leaving. Don’t mind me. Goodbye.” Like the Napoleon Cat at the other end of the confidence pendulum, the Wallflower Cat is also anti-mojo because hiding is reactive. Your goal is to help your cat be his version of Mojito Cat. This means acknowledging his tendencies and easing his anxieties. The information in this section will help you do just that by first helping you understand your feline friend. Source: Special thanks to Jackson Galaxy for his contributions. Creating the Mojito Cat How to create an environment for a confident cat. Read More Stress in Cats Why cats become stressed and how you can minimize stress. Read More Socialization Help prepare your cat for different people, animals and experiences. Read More Translating Feline Body Language Learning how to interpret your cat’s cues. Read more Cat Dwelling Your cat’s environment contributes to his confidence. Read more Help with Feline Behavior Challenges Getting to the bottom of some tricky cat behaviors. Read more Contact UsCareersSitemapPrivacy PolicyAdopt a Pet Pippen Fasseas Adoption Center 1997 N. Clybourn Ave Chicago, IL 60614 - Map it 773-935-7297 (PAWS) Monday - Friday - 12pm-7pm Saturday - Sunday - 11am-5pm SCHEDULE AN ADOPTION APPOINTMENT: Learn about our in-person adoption process at pawschicago.org/adopt. Medical Center & Lurie Clinic 3516 W. 26th Street Chicago, IL 60623 - Map it 773-521-7729 (SPAY) Email clinic@pawschicago.org to make an appointment today. Blazer Building Training Center 1933 N. Marcey Street Chicago, IL 60614 - Map it Please visit PawsChicago.org/training for the most up-to-date information on our virtual and in-person training classes. Englewood Outreach Program Offers programs and resources for neighborhood pet owners. Pet owners in Englewood and Back of the Yards may call 773-217-9113 for more information. Copyright 2023 Follow us: Facebook Twitter Instagram 

Skip to main content The Humane Society of the United States Main navigation Our Fights Our Impact How You Can Help Donate Button Donate Main Menu × Search Humanesociety.org Understanding feline language Deciphering cat behavior SHARE SolStock / iStock.com Cats lack the facial expressiveness of dogs, they’re generally quieter and their behaviors can be harder to interpret—but this doesn’t mean that the feline mystique is impenetrable. You can better understand your furry friend by paying attention to their vocalizations, body postures and daily routines. In time, you may become so attuned to your kitty’s personality and habits that you’re able to detect subtle changes in their mood and even recognize health problems before physical signs of illness appear. Vocalizing You'll learn a lot when you can interpret your cat's wide vocabulary of chirps and meows. They'll tell you when they're hungry, when they're feeling affectionate and if they're feeling threatened or in pain. While some cats rarely make a peep, others won’t let you get a word in edgewise. Kittens who are handled often and well socialized may turn into more vocal adults and certain breeds, like Siameses and Abyssinians, are loquacious by nature. Cats can also become increasingly vocal as they age. Two possible reasons for this are age-related dementia and deteriorating eyesight. A cat who feels anxious or confused may meow to seek reassurance. Hearing loss can also cause a kitty to vocalize louder than usual because they can’t determine their volume. (Any pronounced behavior change should trigger a trip to the vet to make sure your cat isn’t ill or in pain.) Meowing is all-purpose; your cat may be using "meow" as a greeting, a command, an objection or an announcement. Some people have observed their cats walking around the house meowing to themselves. Chirps and trills are how a mother cat tells their kittens to follow them. Aimed at you, it probably means your cat wants you to follow them, usually to their food bowl. If you have more than one cat, you'll often hear them converse with each other this way. Purring is usually a sign of contentment. Cats purr whenever they're happy, even while they're eating. Sometimes, however, a cat may purr when they're anxious or sick, using their purr to comfort themselves, like a child sucking their thumb. Growling, hissing or spitting indicates a cat who is annoyed, frightened, angry or aggressive. Leave this cat alone. A yowl or howl (they sound like loud, drawn-out meows) tells you your cat is in some kind of distress—stuck in a closet, looking for you or in pain. Find your cat if they're making this noise. However, in unaltered cats, these sounds are part of mating behavior. If your cat is elderly, they may howl because they're disoriented, especially if suffering from a cognitive disorder, such as dementia. Chattering, chittering or twittering are the noises your cat makes when they're sitting in the window watching birds or squirrels. It usually translates to excitement ... or they may be contemplating snack time. Top 15 cat tips Sign up to receive our exclusive e-book full of important information about keeping your cat healthy and happy. Get Your Copy Body language Does your cat arch their back up to meet your hand when you pet them? This means they're enjoying this contact with you. Do they shrink away under your slightest touch? Save the petting for later; they're not interested right now. Pay attention to your cat's eyes, ears, body and tail—they're all telling you something. Here are some basic (though sometimes contradictory) clues: Ears Forward: Alert, interested or happy Backward, sideways, flat ("airplane ears"): Irritable, angry or frightened Swiveling: Attentive and listening to every little sound Eyes Pupils constricted: Offensively aggressive, but possibly content Pupils dilated (large): Nervous or submissive (if somewhat dilated), defensively aggressive (if fully dilated), but possibly playful Tail Erect, fur flat: Alert, inquisitive or happy Fur standing up: Angry or frightened Held very low or tucked between legs: Insecure or anxious Thrashing back and forth: Agitated; the faster the tail, the angrier the cat Straight up, quivering: Excited, really happy or, if your cat hasn't been neutered or spayed, they could be getting ready to spray something Body Back arched, fur standing up: Frightened or angry Back arched, fur flat: Welcoming your touch Lying on back, purring: Very relaxed Lying on back, growling: Upset and ready to strike Rubbing When your cat rubs their chin and body against you, they're telling you they love you, right? Well, sort of. What they're really doing is marking their territory. You'll notice that they also rub the chair, the door, their toys and everything in sight. They're telling everyone that this is their stuff, including you. Kneading This is sometimes called "making biscuits," because the cat works their paws on a soft surface as if they're kneading bread dough. It's a leftover behavior from nursing, when they massaged their mother's teats to make milk flow. Your cat does this when they are really happy. The Flehmen response Have you noticed times when your cat—perhaps while sniffing your shoe—lifts their head, opens their mouth slightly, curls back their lips and squints their eyes? They're not making a statement about how your shoe smells, they're gathering more information. Your cat's sense of smell is so essential to them that they actually have an extra olfactory organ that very few other creatures have, the Jacobson's organ. It's located on the roof of their mouth behind their front teeth and is connected to the nasal cavity. When your cat gets a whiff of something really fascinating, they open their mouth and inhale so that the scent molecules flow over the Jacobson's organ. This intensifies the odor and provides more information about the object they're sniffing. A key to your cat's moods Wondering if your cat is happy, meditating or having a bad day? Here's are some tips: Content: Sitting or lying down, eyes half closed, pupils narrowed, tail mostly still, ears forward and purring—a really happy cat will often knead on a soft surface. Playful: Ears forward, tail up, whiskers forward and pupils somewhat dilated—playing is hunting behavior; your cat may stalk their prey (a toy, a housemate or you), then crouch down with their rear end slightly raised. A little wiggle of the butt, then ... pounce! Your cat will grab their prey, bite it, wrestle it the floor and kick it with their hind feet. Irritated or overstimulated: Pupils dilated, ears turned back and tail twitching or waving—your cat may growl or put their teeth on you as a warning to cease and desist. Intense play can quickly turn into overstimulation in some cats, resulting in biting and scratching. Nervous or anxious: Ears sideways or back, pupils dilated and tail low or tucked between legs—your cat may slink through the house close to the floor, looking for somewhere to hide. They may turn their face to the wall to shut the world out. Frightened or startled: Think Halloween cat—ears back and flat against their head, whiskers back, back arched, fur standing on end and tail erect or low. They may yowl, growl, hiss and spit. Defensive: Crouched, ears flattened, whiskers back, tail between their legs or wrapped around their body and pupils dilated—they may meow loudly, growl, hiss and spit. Angry, aggressive: Ears back, pupils very constricted and their tail may be up or down with the fur standing on end—an aggressive cat will stare down another cat and growl or yowl until the other cat gives way. Cats don't really want to fight; they prefer standoffs, but this can progress to fighting if one of the cats doesn't back down. Your gift will do so much for animals in need. We never know where disasters will strike or when animals may be in need of rescue, but we know we must be ready. Donate today to support our lifesaving work. Help Animals Today Also of interest: 4,000 Beagles Understanding rabiesHome, sweet home: How to bring an outside cat indoors Get HSUS news and action alerts Mobile number Thank you for signing up for text alerts!You will receive text messages with ways to help animals right from your phone. By providing your mobile number, you agree to receive autodialed, recurring text messages from the HSUS with updates and ways you can help animals. Message and data rates may apply. Text STOP to 77879 to opt out, HELP for info. Privacy policy. Terms and conditions. Footer All Our Fights Animals Events News Press Room Blog Shop Stream Podcast Donate One-time and Recurring Membership Matching Gifts Major Gifts and Grants Legacy Giving Vehicle Donation Host a Fundraiser Volunteer About us Our Mission Leadership Governance Financial Information Affiliates Careers Internships Diversity, Equity and Inclusion FAQ Contact Us All Animals magazine Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn YouTube © 2023 The Humane Society of the United States Privacy policy and terms. The Humane Society of the United States is registered as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization. Contributions to the HSUS are tax-deductible to the extent permitted by law. The HSUS's tax identification number is 53-0225390. Transparency in coverage. Footer Right Better Business Bureau Accredited Charity 

Skip to Content Search Search for: Close Search × Getting a Cat Cat Names Kittens Types of Cat Breeds Maine Coon Cats Ragdoll Cats Siamese Cats Siberian Cats Rare Cat Breeds Cat Behavior Cat health Cat Sleeping Cats and Dogs Understanding Your Cat Cat Reviews Cat Food Cat Products Cat Fun BLOG CONTACT About Editorial Policy Privacy Policy Meet Our Experts 37 Top Cat Behaviors Explained (2023) By: Author Amanda OBrien Posted on Last updated: June 1, 2023 We love our furry felines but there is no denying that they can do some rather strange things. And to complicate things further at different times cats will have different motivations for the same behaviors. Oh they don’t make it easy for us! A happy cat is our number one priority. So let’s get stuck into some of the most common cat behaviours – from following you everywhere to staring at you to licking then biting you to loving to headbutt you and many more – and what on earth is motivating our fluffy felines. Contents 37 Top Cat Behaviors Cat Behaviors Why Do Cats Meow Back At You? (2022) | 7 Reasons for Chatty Cats As a cat parent, you’ve probably meowed at your cat at least once, trying to communicate with them in their native language. A few times, it may have worked, and they’ve responded. But why do cats meow back at you? You don’t need to have one of the smartest cat breeds to know how intelligent these tiny felines are. Any cat owner would know that each pet has its own personality and that you get to learn something new from them all the time. And, after 10 000 years of domestication, it’s surprising that they haven’t learned to speak to their owners. Or have they? Continue Reading Why Do Cats Meow at Night? 12 Reasons If you’re a cat parent to a kitty that meow’s throughout the night, you may be concerned or simply fed up with getting poor sleep. Otherwise known as night vocalization or night-calling, these midnight symphonies are not uncommon behavior. You’re not alone as many cat lovers are dragging themselves out of bed to quiet a feisty feline. Either way, when it comes to our fur babies, it’s best to rule out any troublesome causes and rest easy at night knowing they are healthy and happy. So how can you ensure that both you and your cat can have sweet dreams again? Let’s find out. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Pant? 8 Reasons We often see dogs panting and don't assume that it is a cause for concern. However, cats don't tend to pant often. So what does it mean when they do? And is there anything you can do to calm your cat down when it happens? Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Follow Me Everywhere? 13 Top Reasons Why Cats have a reputation for being stand-offish and often disinterested. But this reputation can often be very wrong. I have a Siberian cat Alexei and he loves following me around the house. Alexei isn't unique - many cats like to follow their owners around - and even to the bathroom. So why do they do this? Cats have domesticated themselves so the reasons for them following their owners around tend to be postive. Here are 13 Reasons why your cat follows you. Continue Reading What Does it Mean When a Cat Licks You? 9 Reasons You Should Know We all love our adorable felines - from their purrfect little stares to their rough, bristled tongues that lick us as though we're a tasty snack. But what does it mean when a cat licks you? It's a common question that many cat owners query. Many assume kitties lick them as a sure sign of love - which isn't that far off. While it's difficult to determine whether cats feel complex emotions such as love, licking is a sign of affection. Mother cats lick their kittens as part of the grooming process, which continues into adulthood. Cats also designate members to allogrooming - to lick each other. Let's take a further look below into why cats lick us. Continue Reading What Does It Mean When A Cat Stares At You? 5 Reasons You Should Know Cats are peculiar and fascinating creatures. Some of their habits, such as your kitty’s soft purrs, are easy for us to understand as affectionate. Other behavioral characteristics of cats are far more confusing. If you’ve caught your cat intently staring, you might have felt like they were trying to communicate. Perhaps you’ve been woken up to your cat eyeballing you while sitting on your chest. Or, you may have felt their gaze boring into your back. Whether you’re worried about their well being, curious about your cat’s behavior, or just plain creeped out. You’re not alone in wondering what it means when a cat stares at you. Do these wide-eyed, soul-searing stares mean something specific? Let’s review what’s known about the topic. Continue Reading Why Doesn’t My Cat Purr? 6 Reasons You Should Know For many cat owners, that luxurious, cheerful purr is one of the best reasons for owning a cat. In fact, studies show that people who have felines have less stress-induced health issues, which may be linked to our kitties’ purrs. No wonder, then, that you’re upset and asking, “Well, just why doesn’t my cat purr?” I get it; it’d be hard for me, too, to lose out on this adorable trait. Once you’ve understood the function of purring, you’ll see that there are a variety of reasons for a feline to stop making the sound. In most cases, there’s absolutely nothing to worry about. Where there is cause for concern, there is treatment. So, let’s take a closer look at the mysterious purr. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Arch Their Back? 5 Reasons You Should Know You’ve probably seen your cat in this famous Halloween pose. Tail up, back stretched upwards, and just enjoying the moment. But why do cats arch their back? Cats tend to do very funny things, like claw at us and lick our noses. But one of the most famous and unique cat behaviors is the arching of their backs. These nimble little creatures are very flexible and get into some interesting positions from time to time. If you’d like to know more about why your cat is arching his back, keep reading! Continue Reading Why Do Cats Sleep in a Ball? (2022) 4 Reasons For Curled-Up Kitties You’ve probably come across this sweet sight many times—your furry friend curled into a tight ball and sleeping soundly. Cats take on many different sleeping positions that often leave us wondering why they would sleep in this way. While the curled-into-a-ball position is one of the more normal ways to see a cat sleeping, it might still make you wonder. Why do cats sleep in a ball? Some owners are concerned that their pet might be sick, cold, or stressed when they find their feline curled up in a ball. To set your mind at rest, let’s take a look at some of the main reasons why your cat would sleep in this curled-up position. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Purr and Then Bite You? (2022) 6 Reasons Cats are an interesting species. They are the epitome of mixed signals. One moment they will be loving, purring, and stroking themselves on you. The next moment you have some tiny teeth digging into your skin. Why do cats purr and then bite you? It's tough to decipher what cats want from you when they can't tell you. It's not like they speak English (although that would be incredible). So when your cat seems to be enjoying the affection you are giving them and then suddenly turns around and bites you, you are right to be confused. As a cat lover, you need to make an effort to learn how they communicate with you. Animals have signals that they use to show you how they are feeling. And unless you understand these signals and what they mean, there's going to be a lot of confusion and miscommunication. You might even be putting your kitties in a situation they don't like without knowing it. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Growl? 7 Reasons You Should Know Our kitties are creatures full of mystery. One moment you'll see your furbaby kneading your stomach, head butting or rubbing up against you, and the next, they act as if they don't know who you are. They may go from purring little sweethearts to suddenly despise the sight of you. What causes the switch to flip in behavior from purring, snacking, snuggling kitties to growling ones? Why do cats growl? Cats have various vocalizations that they use to communicate, and growling or hissing is a common way in which cats express themselves. A cat who growls, spits, or hisses indicates a clear sign they are agitated, angry, or afraid of something. Although we cannot speak fluent meow, let's look into trying to understand why cats growl. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Purr When You Stroke Them? 6 Reasons You Need to Know For many cat owners, that luxurious, cheerful purr is one of the best reasons for owning a cat. In fact, studies show that people who have felines have less stress-induced health issues, which may be linked to our kitties’ purrs. No wonder, then, that you’re upset and asking, “Well, just why doesn’t my cat purr?” I get it; it’d be hard for me, too, to lose out on this adorable trait. Once you’ve understood the function of purring, you’ll see that there are a variety of reasons for a feline to stop making the sound. In most cases, there’s absolutely nothing to worry about. Where there is cause for concern, there is treatment. So, let’s take a closer look at the mysterious purr. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Sit On Me? 8 Reasons You Should Know You’re all snug and settled on the sofa, or typing away at your laptop, and suddenly, your adorable kitty jumps onto your lap, curls into a ball, and purrs away peacefully. Many ponder the question, “Why does my cat sit on me?”. There are many ways to express oneself in cat word. Cats like to sit on laps because they feel secure and safe near you. They may be trying to warm themselves up or are coming to you for attention. Once they feel satisfied, they’ll often leave to do something far more interesting. All kitties have unique personalities; some are more loving and keen snugglers; while others may prefer to hang out alone and keep their distance. Then there are the lap cats that are ready to leap onto your legs and blissfully enjoy your company. Let’s take a look at some reasons why our kitties choose to sit on us rather than curling up on their comfy beds and with their toys. Continue Reading What Does It Mean When A Cat Rubs Against You? 5 Reasons You Should Know If you're a cat owner, you’ve likely wondered why cats rub against one person but not another. Your fluffy companion might greet you at the door and rub against your legs, but be aloof when your partner or friend enters through the same door. Why do they do this? What does it mean when a cat rubs against you? Are they fishing for affection or coaxing you for a treat? The answer is very simple. You are family! But how does it work? Why do they do this? What does it mean when a cat rubs against you? Are they fishing for affection or coaxing you for a treat? The answer is very simple. You are family! But how does it work? Continue Reading What Does it Mean When a Cat Headbutts you? 10 Things You Need to Know Does your kitty like to bump heads with you? Have you ever wandered what it means when it does this? Is it love - or is it anger? After all, a human headbutting a human is definitely not a sign of love! Find all the theories about what does it mean when a cat headbutts you in my post. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Bite My Feet? 7 Reasons If you’ve ever owned a cat, chances are you’ve been a victim of a scratch or cat bite. It’s not always a violent affair. Cats love to bite gently when playing or to warn you of something. Sometimes, cats will focus on particular parts of your body to attack or bite, like feet. Why do they do this? Why does my cat bite my feet? Cats bite for lots of different reasons. They also have different kinds of bites. A gentle nibble is a non-aggressive interaction, while a real bite will be born of aggression or fear. In the case of cats attacking your feet, it’s most likely the former. Even so, there are plenty of reasons why your cat may decide to bite your feet. In this article, we’ll look at a few possible reasons for this behavior and what you might be able to do to change it. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Rub Their Faces on Things? 8 Reasons Does your cat like to rub its face on everything? From you to the couch to other animals to soft toys? There are several reasons that cats like to rub their faces on things and they can vary depening on the object being rubbed and the context. A key thing to know about why do cats rub their faces on things is that cats have several scent glands located across their heads. They rub their heads on objects or "bunt" to leave their scent behind. Cats generally like to choose objects that stand out to bunt and male cats tend to bunt more than females. This behaviour was developed by cats when they were in the wild. Cats tend to rub their ears and foreheads on items that are quite high to them and then use the bottom of their cheeks to mark objects that are at the same height as their heads. The chin and the throat then rub against lower items. Cats also have scent glands in their tails and their feet. From pillows to blankets, furniture, carpets, and their servant humans, you’ve probably experienced your adorable little feline massaging or kneading you or items in your household some time or another.Here are eight reasons why cats like to rub their faces on things. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Knead Their Owners? 8 Reasons You Should Know From pillows to blankets, furniture, carpets, and their servant humans, you’ve probably experienced your adorable little feline massaging or kneading you or items in your household some time or another. Why do cats knead their owners? It’s one of the mysterious, and sometimes charming, quirks our kitties present us with. The push-forward motions of their paws impersonating kneading dough — ‘making biscuits’. If your kitty does this at times, you may be wondering why do cats knead us? Let’s take a look into some reasons behind why cats make biscuits on our bodies. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Roll in the Dirt? 9 Reasons for Dust Bathing Why do cats roll in the dirt? Have you ever looked out into the garden to see your beloved purrfect kitty rolling gleefully in the dirt? The complete opposite of seeing your fur baby neatly sitting, licking themselves clean, or admiring your grooming efforts? What's going on? While our fur babies have dust baths and we fear for their beautiful silky coats getting dirty, they have good reasons for doing it. It may seem a bit odd, especially with all our caring efforts; however, it's actually a good way for them to care for themselves. So, unless you have a full-time indoor cat breed, let's take a peek at some reasons why cats roll in the dirt when they get outside. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Fart So Much? 7 Reasons Cats are graceful creatures, from their head to their barbed, expressive tail. Even their personalities reflect that sophistication and refinement. So, it can come as a bit of a surprise when your kitty ‘lets one rip’ bad enough to clear the room. Although most cat parents will never witness their cats pass gas, it does happen. When a cat farts, it’s silent and undetectable in odor. But if you have noticed that your cat is passing gas frequently, that could be a sign of an irritable digestive system. But don’t hit the panic button just yet. Most causes for your kitties' flatulence are not life-threatening. In this guide, you’ll find the possible reasons why your cat farts so much and ways to help them manage their excessive flatulence. Continue Reading Why is My Cat Shaking? 4 Causes Seeing your cat shaking may be very alarming for a cat owner. For one thing, it’s an unusual sort of behavior, and your first instinct will likely be to assume the worst. First things first - don’t panic. Try to remain calm - there could be several reasons for your cat experiencing shaking, and not all of them are life-threatening. Shakes can result from something as innocuous as your cat dreaming, to feeling a bit cold, to an illness or undiagnosed condition. So bear in mind that not all shaking in cats is cause for alarm. In this article, we’ll look at the most common causes of the question why is my cat shaking and what you can do to alleviate at least a few of the reasons. In all situations, though, consider consulting your vet if the shaking persists. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Sleep With Me and Not My Husband? 7 Reasons One of the many reasons why animal lovers are drawn to cats is their curious and independent nature. However, that's only one side to their personality. Cats are also very affectionate and loving. Many new kitty parents may be surprised to learn that their cat wants to curl up next to them at night. But what if your cat is curling up to you and only you at night? And not your partner? Are you the favorite? Is that even a thing? Well, cats are known for picking favorites, and they even do it in their sleep. It’s more common than you think, so do not feel guilty if you’re the chosen one. However, if you aren’t the one your cat is running to for a bedtime story and forehead kisses, here’s your chance to finally understand why. You can find the most common reasons for cat sleeping preferences below. Continue Reading Why do Cats Stick Their Tongues Out? 15 Reasons Does your cat like to stick its tongue out? Cats can look quite hilarious and/or quite cute when they stick their tongues out - which is good as they do tend to do it frequently. Unlike with humans, it is unlikely that your cat is being rude to you when it sticks its tongue out - so why do cats stick their tongues out? Continue Reading Why Do Cats Lick Each Other? 6 Reasons Kitties Allogroom It’s one of the sweetest sights...one kitten leans into another and begins to lick its fur. As cute as we think this behavior is, there is actually practical logic behind it. So, why do cats lick each other? For our finicky felines, licking is key to grooming, which, as any kitty owner knows, cats are obsessed with. They’re not just randomly flinging their tongues across each other but engaging in an elaborate communication system. Many people think that cats who lick each other are showing their affection. While this is often true, there are many different reasons behind this conduct. And fortunately, if you have only one cat, it is a behavior you can replicate. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Attack Me? 8 Reasons You Should Know Anyone who’s owned a cat carries scars on their hands and fingers. Literally. But that’s normal for feline owners. Almost everyone will talk about how they got those scars with adoration, rather than scorn. In many cases, cats simply offer claws in return for fingers. Who doesn’t know the sudden claw-first grab after a tummy rub that’s gone on too long? Why does my cat attack me? Sometimes, however, cats exhibit behavior that is problematic in its aggression. These kinds of attacks are not defensive and can inflict unexpected and occasionally severe damage. Behaviorists have determined a few possible causes for why cats attack their owners. If you’re finding living with your cat increasingly stressful because of aggressive behavior towards you, keep reading. You may be able to identify one of these as a cause. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Sleep with Me? 4 Reasons You Should Know For animals with the reputation of being cold and independent, many cats are surprisingly cuddly when it comes to bedtime. Most pet owners don’t question this too much — after all, who doesn’t want a real-life teddy bear? However, there are specific answers to “why does my cat sleep with me,” and it’s 100% worth learning about these. Understanding why they indulge in this behavior will help you to better care for and bond with your feline. Many of the factors that drive your fur baby to sit on your lap are the very same ones that lead him to curl up beside you in bed. Let’s take a closer look at this kitty behavior. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Chase Their Tails? 5 Things You Need to Know Why do cats chase their tails? Does your cat chase its own tail? My cat Alexei certainly does and I always find it very amusing. I didn't realise that cats actually did this until I got my Siberian cat. However, a cat chasing its own tail can have several meanings - not all of which are fun. Here are some things to think about if your cat is chasing its tail. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Sleep On My Legs? 10 Reasons You Should Know However, a cat chasing its own tail can have several meanings - not all of which are fun. Here are some things to think about if your cat is chasing its tail. Well, you’re not alone. While many cat owners are more than happy to curl up with their kitties, there is often the mystery of why cats enjoy sleeping on their human’s legs. Often your cat will have a beautiful, comfy bed all to itself, but would rather join you in your bed and stretch out over your legs. So let’s dig a bit deeper into why cats do this, and whether it’s something you should be concerned about, or just thankful for. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Lay on my Chest: 5 Reasons Why As a cat parent, it’s handy to know as much as you can about your feline, such as how best to care for your cat, and even what their different behaviors mean - like why does my cat lay on my chest? Not many people have stopped to ponder why cats like to lie on their humans, either. There are plenty of theories to discuss when it comes to why your babies may like to lounge around on your chest, limbs, or even your face. While there are many myths about cats and how they simply use you for room and lodging, they’re simply not true. Cats are loving and loyal, and they show their affection in many ways. Some of these include bringing you their cat toys, following you around, or even - you guessed it - laying on you. Let’s dive right into some of the theories surrounding why your kitty may like to lie on you. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Eat My Hair? 9 Reasons All cat parents know how much their felines like to groom themselves. But what happens when your kitty starts to groom you? Why does my cat eat my hair? There are several possible answers to the question of why your cat is eating or chewing your hair. And if you don't like this behaviour or it is getting out of control there are quite a few ways to discourage this behavior. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Lick my Nose? 10 Reasons Why Cats have a fantastic reputation when it comes to cleanliness. Their main method of grooming is to use their tongue to lick themselves - starting with their cute faces and then moving to their loges, body and ending at the tail. By why does my cat lick my nose? Cats come equipped with special tongues that have a texture that resembles sandpaper. This sandpaper texture is created by the papillae which are backward-facing hooks made of keratin. The rougher texture helps the cat to remove dirt. The reason that all this grooming takes place is to protect and isolate the cat from high and low temperatures. If their tongue doesn't do the job cats will then use their teeth to finish off their preening. Kittens are cleaned by their mothers from the day they are born and then come to learn how to clean themselves. This behaviour reinforces the family and social bonds between mother and kitten and siblings. As your kitty's human you are now their family. This means that no matter how old your cat is it will practice some kitten behaviours in your presence. This is generally why your cat will rub itself against you or jump up on you - it is trying to get to your face. Indeed one of the reasons that cats like their owners asleep or lying down is that it is their perfect setting (eg everyone is relaxed) for grooming. Your cat will also be looking to exchange odors with us as our smells are comforting to your cat. Now that you understand why cats practice licking behaviour and its role let's get into the key reasons why your cat is licking your nose. Continue Reading Why Does my Cat Lick me then Bite Me? When my Siberian cat Alexei licks me I take it as a sign of love. However, when he quickly follows the licking up with a bite I begin to think that he might feel otherwise! I was heartened to discover that this problem is not unique to Alexei and that many other cat owners have asked why does my cat lick me then bite me? It can be very confusing when your cat displays what seems to be loving behaviour and then behaviour that can actually cause you pain. Is it angry? What have you done wrong? And what should you do? Here are 5 reasons why your cat may lick you and then bite you - plus some of the other most frequently asked questions in this area. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Bite Their Nails? 9 Reasons You Should Know When humans bite their nails, it’s usually dismissed as a nervous tick or merely a bad habit. At worst, it is thought of as impolite or unhygienic. Why do cats bite their nails? While it’s generally considered normal, it can sometimes be a cause for concern for reasons we’ll discuss below. Cats chew their claws as a regular part of grooming - your cat enjoys cleanliness after all. Excessive biting can be a sign of an underlying problem, though. It could be a behavioral issue brought on by stress or anxiety. But it could also be a medical issue, which may require a visit to your vet. Either way, you’ll want to keep an eye on such behavior, as it may lead to more significant problems if ignored. Read on to find out why cats bite their nails and when you should be concerned. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Cover Their Face When They Sleep? (2022) 8 Reasons Nothing makes your heart skip a beat like finding your little pussy cat curled up with a paw delicately placed over its face. It’s a cuteness overload few cat owners can resist, and virtually all cats exhibit this behavior in their lifetimes. But why do cats cover their face when they sleep? Cats spend a lot of time sleeping, after all. So noticing their behavior while they’re dreaming away the day or night is natural for a doting pet parent. You may even notice that your cat tends to cover their face a lot and be curious why. Is it a bad sign, you might wonder? Or just your cat being a cat? Stress no more, for this article has the low-down on the most common reasons why cats cover their faces while sleeping. Get ready to learn a lot about this cute pose and what it might mean for your feline friend. Continue Reading Why Does My Cat Try to Bury Her Food? (2022) 4 Reasons Wait, isn’t it dogs that bury their food? As it turns out, canines aren’t the only ones with ancient instincts that compel them to cover up their coveted cuisine. Cats can have a tendency to do this as well — perhaps you’ve even caught them in the act and wondered what they were doing it for. So why does my cat try to bury her food? Maybe they’re just weird, you might think. But cats have very real reasons for wanting to bury their food. Whether it’s the best dry food money can buy your kitten or sumptuous wet food that makes your cat drool, cats don’t discriminate when it comes to burying urges. If you need answers now, you’ve come to the right place. Here we’ll discuss the most common reasons why your cat might be burying their food and just how normal it is. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Sleep Next to Their Owners? (2022) 7 Reasons For Cuddles Many cat lovers would agree that having your cat sleep next to you feels like you’ve hit the jackpot and are being showered with love. But have you ever wondered, “why do cats sleep next to their owners rather than in their own bed?” Well, there are many reasons for cats’ sleeping positions and behaviors. You might find your fur baby snoozing next to you because they trust you, or they could simply be seeking warmth. To help you understand your cat's behavior a little better, I've put together a list of the most common reasons why cats sleep next to their owners. Continue Reading Why Do Cats Knead and Bite Blankets? (2022) 5 Reasons Many cats have a habit of kneading and biting blankets. Most owners have seen them do it. It's a hilariously cute activity and never fails to draw a coo of admiration from us. Obviously, the question is why do cats knead and bite blankets? Common wisdom usually explains it thus: The kneading comes from a kitten's action meant to stimulate milk production in its mother. A kitten will knead a mother's teats in order to assist with getting milk out. That, you may be fascinated to hear, is just the tip of the proverbial iceberg. There are several reasons cats may knead or bite at their blankets, including one or two that may require a closer look. Sometimes, a cat’s biting may be a sign of a problem. Here's the explanation: Continue Reading This cat behaviors post contains affiliate links. That means if you click through and make a purchase I will most likely receive a small commission. This won’t affect the price you pay. Just wanted to make sure you knew. Amanda OBrienAmanda created and owns The Discerning Cat. A lifelong cat lover she is the proud parent of two Siberian cats, Alexei and Vladimir. She is passionate about understanding cats and different cat breeds. By Author Amanda OBrien Posted on Last updated: June 1, 2023 Categories Cat Behavior, Understanding Your Cat Post navigation When Do Cats Shed The Most? I What Owners Need to KnowDo Cats Get Hotspots? (2023) How to Know and How to Treat It This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. Home Welcome to The Discerning Cat Hi I'm Amanda, an Australian who calls London home. When I got my amazing Siberian cats Alexei and Vladimir I couldn't find the kind of information that I wanted online. I wanted to know what drove their behavior and how I could make them as happy as possible. So I set up my own site! Top Shared Cat PostsUltimate Profile on Siamese Cat Personality TraitsBest Egyptian Cat Names You’ll Love for Your Egyptian Cats23 Most Expensive Cat Breeds in the World (2023)Siberian Cat Colors - A Complete Guide on All Types & PatternsHow to Look after a Kitten: Your Complete Guide Recent Posts 43 Wholesome Cat Memes That Will Make You Smile 2023 The Little Warrior: A Kitten’s Journey from Abandonment to Hope A Kitten’s Miracle: Sandman’s Road to Recovery 37 Cursed Cat Memes 2023 | Strangest Kitties on the Internet Most Popular Posts ⇒ 9 Cat Sleeping Positions when Sick ⇒ 10 Flat Faced Cat Breeds ⇒ All About the Flame Point Siamese Cat ⇒ 15 Grey Cat Breeds ⇒ Best Dry Food for Kittens ⇒ 17 Types of Siamese Cats Web Stories Cat Breeds Siamese Cats Maine Coon Cats Cat Names Kittens Behavior Sleeping Health Cats and Dogs Product Reviews About Contact Editorial Policy Meet our Experts Blog Privacy © 2023 The Discerning Cat Blog . All rights reserved. The Discerning Cat is owned by Beyond the Horizon. Find out more on the about page. | Trellis Framework by Mediavine 

Close Search About Us Everyday Care Main Menu CareClub Know Your Pet Breed Information Press Center Main Menu Press Center Events Careers Shop Explore Shop Main Menu Explore Shop All Products All Products Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Dogs For Dogs Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Cats For Cats Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets Find Care Welcome to Existing Account Already have a myVCA account? Log in 24/7 to access your pet’s health care information. Log In Now Activate Your Account Looking for a convenient way to access your pet’s health records, refill prescriptions, view upcoming appointments and more? Set up your myVCA account today. Activate Account Find Care myVCA Search Shopping Cart × Search Home Know Your Pet First Aid For Dogs First Aid for Dogs - Shock, Rescue Breathing, and CPR By Malcolm Weir, DVM, MSc, MPH; Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Ernest Ward, DVM Print Article Emergencies come in all forms - automobile accidents, bite wounds, burns, heat stroke, poisoning, seizures, and more. For a general overview of what constitutes an emergency and how to handle common crisis situations, see the handout “Emergencies in Dogs”. What is first aid?First aid is the initial treatment given in a medical emergency. Its purpose is to preserve life, reduce pain and discomfort, and minimize any risk of permanent disability or disfigurement In an emergency, what should I do first? Keep calm and assess the scene for any additional threats to you or your pet. This is important for everyone's safety. Keep your dog warm (except in the case of heat stroke), as quiet as possible, and keep movement to a minimum, especially if there is possible trauma, broken limbs, or any neurological symptoms. Contact your veterinary hospital, inform them of the situation, and get specific first aid advice. To safely move or transport an injured dog, get somebody to help you. For a small dog, put him into his carrier (remove the top for easy and safe access to the carrier; DO NOT push an injured dog through the small door or opening) or use a suitable container such as a strong cardboard box. For a larger dog, use a makeshift stretcher made from some rigid material such as an appropriate-sized, sturdy piece of wood. Carefully maneuver your dog onto a blanket or coat so that he can be gently moved to the carrier, box, or stretcher. Get to a veterinary hospital as soon as possible. What are some tips on restraining or calming an injured dog?Most injured animals will be panicked and/or disoriented. The stress of an emergency can cause an otherwise friendly animal to act aggressively. Although most panicky dogs will respond to a calm, soothing voice, use caution when approaching or touching any injured animal. It is important to ensure the safety of all rescue personnel that are attempting to assist an injured animal. Some of the types of restraint that can ensure the safety of both dogs and humans include: Muzzling: You can create a muzzle out of a leash, belt, necktie, sock, rope, or strap. Loop the cord around your dog's muzzle and tighten it to prevent him from biting. Dogs have only one muscle to open their jaw so once the jaw is closed, it is relatively easy to hold it safely shut. Dogs can breathe through their nostrils unless the nose is injured or obstructed. Wrapping: You can wrap the body of an unmanageable dog in a blanket or towel. Be sure to keep his head exposed and do not constrict the trachea. Immobilizing: If you are suspicious of spinal injury, lay your dog on a board and secure him on the board with straps or cords. Try to keep the head and neck immobilized. What is shock?Shock is a complex systemic (whole-body) reaction to a number of emergency situations, including severe trauma, hemorrhage or sudden blood loss, heart failure, and other causes of decreased circulation (e.g., severe and sudden allergic reaction and heat stroke). A life-threatening fall in blood pressure is a dangerous part of shock. If not treated quickly and effectively, systemic shock may cause irreversible injury to body cells and can be fatal. What are the signs of shock?Clinical signs of systemic shock include rapid breathing and elevated heart rate with pale mucous membranes (gums, lips, and under the eyelids). Your dog’s feet or ears may feel cold, and he may vomit or shiver. As shock progresses, most pets become quiet and unresponsive. What should I do if my dog is showing signs of shock?Keep your dog as quiet as possible and try to conserve heat by covering him with blankets, towels, or even newspapers. Follow the A, B, and Cs of first aid: A Airway B Breathing C Cardiac function Airway. Anything that obstructs the airway prevents oxygen from entering the lungs. Do your best to clear the mouth and throat of any obstruction (e.g., vomit, saliva, or foreign bodies such as grass, sticks, or balls). Be careful - your dog may bite you in panic. Breathing. If your dog is unconscious and does not appear to be breathing, try gently pumping his chest with the palm of your hand, at the same time feeling just behind the elbow to detect a heartbeat or pulse. If unsuccessful, perform rescue breathing (see below). Be careful - injured pets may bite you out of fear. Cardiac function. If you are unable to detect a heartbeat or pulse, or if it appears weak and slow, try pressing on the chest with your palm and elevating the lower half of the body to promote blood flow to the brain. Follow the CPR steps below. How do I perform rescue breathing for my dog?If your dog is unresponsive, ensure that there is an open airway. Carefully pull the tongue out of the mouth. Extend the head and neck so that they are in a straight line. DO NOT overextend the neck if your dog has obvious head and neck trauma. Carefully clear the mouth of any debris that may be obstructing breathing. Place your hand over your dog’s muzzle while holding the mouth shut and extending the neck. For small dogs, you can sometimes improvise with a Styrofoam cup or other similar item, by placing the opening over your dog's face and poking a large hole in the bottom for you to breathe through. Ensure a relatively tight seal around the muzzle. Blowing into the nostrils, give two to three breaths and watch for a rise in the chest. If you do not see a rise in the chest, reposition the neck or search for airway obstruction. If you see an obstruction but cannot remove it, you can attempt the XXT maneuver if your dog is unconscious. This is useful in dogs who have balls stuck at the entrance of their trachea and is gentler than the Heimlich maneuver. Lay your dog on his back on the floor and straddle his body while positioning his head and trachea parallel to the floor. Larger objects will be palpable in the throat area just behind the bone of the lower jaw (mandible). Use your fingers to press down on the lower jaw, keeping the neck straight and the head stable and on the floor, then use your thumbs to “milk” the palpable obstruction with a “J-stroke” downwards and toward the nose If you believe there is an airway obstruction that you cannot see, you can attempt a modified Heimlich maneuver on your dog to attempt a forceful expulsion of an obstruction. If your dog is standing, you can stand or kneel over and behind your dog. Place your hands under his body just behind his ribs and thrust quickly upwards and forwards. If your dog is lying down, use one hand on his back and the other hand to squeeze the belly upwards and forwards. Smaller dogs can be gently picked up by their thighs and swung side to side. Pressure can be applied just behind the ribcage in a forward motion if obstruction persists. For rescue breathing, provide 20 breaths per minute. If your dog fails to breathe on his own, you may attempt an acupressure maneuver. Press firmly with your fingernail or another hard, dull object in the space just beneath the nose on the upper lip (nasal philtrum). Maintain the pressure for 10-30 seconds. What if my dog requires CPR?If there are still no obvious signs of life after you have established an airway and begun rescue breathing, you should attempt chest compressions: Make sure there is no major bleeding. If there is bleeding, have an assistant manage the bleeding while you perform CPR. If possible, lay your dog on his right side. Feel for a heartbeat or femoral pulse. The femoral pulse is located inside the leg in the groin region. Dogs do not have a readily palpable carotid (neck) pulse. Bend the left forearm and note the location where the elbow touches the chest. This is close to the middle of the rib cage. Placing one hand on each side of the chest in the middle of the rib cage, vigorously compress the chest 100-120 times per minute. For small dogs (under 10 pounds), use one hand to compress the chest from both sides by putting your fingers on one side and your thumb on the other side of the chest. The rate should be about 30 compressions for every 2 breaths. Try to compress the chest wall at least 30-50%. This is about 1" (2 cm) in small dogs and 2-3" (5-8 cm) in larger dogs. Is there anything else I should know?After being involved in an emergency or accident, it is important that you take your dog for a veterinary examination as soon as possible, even if he appears to have recovered fully. More handouts in the First Aid series provide advice specific to other types of injuries and medical emergencies. Keywords Emergencies Pet Services Find a Hospital Locate a hospital near you Learn more Related Articles VCA ANIMAL HOSPITALS About Us Contact Us Find a Hospital Location Directory Press Center Social Responsibility Career Opportunities Grow Your Hospital Sitemap Affiliate of Mars Inc. 2023 | © Copyright VCA Animal Hospitals all rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Web Accessibility | AdChoices | Cookie Notice | Cookie Settings | Your Privacy Choices 

Skip to Main Content Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Menu Find a pet Main menuFind a pet Find a pet Rehome a pet Rehome a pet How to rehome Rehome a horse Rehome a horse How to rehome a horse Foster an animal Foster an animal Horse fostering Advice for adopters Advice for adopters Advice and welfare Main menuAdvice and welfare Advice and welfare Pets Pets Dogs Cats Rabbits Horses Rodents Ferrets Exotic pets Ornamental Fish General Giving up a pet Pet bereavement Find or call a vet Pet theft Brachycephalic animals Lost and found Lab animals Lab animals Phasing out Are animal experiments necessary? Testing chemicals Medicines and vaccines Replacing research animals Reducing research animal suffering Primates and research Biotechnology Farm animals Farm animals Farm animals as pets Slaughter On-farm Live transport Pigs Laying hens Sheep Farmed fish Meat chickens Ducks Dairy cows Beef cattle Turkeys Farmed rabbits Foie Gras Worried about a farm animal? Bovine TB Litter Litter Fishing litter Alternatives to balloons and sky lanterns Single use plastics Sky lanterns Seasonal advice Seasonal advice Spring Summer Autumn Winter Floods Pets at Christmas Diseases Diseases Alabama rot Performing animals Performing animals Guidelines Report concerns FAQs The cost-of-living crisis The cost-of-living crisis Pet cost calculator Food bank Food bank donation point Dog behaviour care costs Wildlife friendly gardening Wildlife friendly gardening The RSPCA wildlife garden Wildlife Wildlife Foxes Squirrels Hedgehogs Otters Seals Bats Rats and mice Rabbits and Hares Find a wildlife rescue centre Wildlife deterrents Injured wild animals Badgers Snakes Deer Wildlife in captivity Wildlife laws Get involved Main menuGet involved Get involved Volunteer Volunteer What can I do? What's it like to volunteer with us? Volunteers' week Big Help Out Campaign Campaign Puppy trade Stun before slaughter Primates as pets Sentient beings Circuses Sanctuaries Farm Animals Better chicken Tougher sentencing Make Wales kinder for animals I'm a Celebrity Stop live exports Animal rehoming Fur Free Britain Gene editing Pets as prizes End the cage age Lab animal regulations Save our breath Join our campaign network Achievements Phase Out Lab Animals Fireworks Slaughterhouses Rabbit breeding End Sky Litter Ear cropping Vapes Better labels better choices End Breed Specific Legislation Act now for animals Donate Donate Leaving a legacy Current appeals Donate in memory Advice for donors Payroll Giving Unwanted items Gift Aid Sponsorship Philanthropy Win Win Raffle Lottery Fundraise Fundraise Virtual challenges At school Animal Hero Running Trekking Cycling Training hub Own place in an event Ideas and resources Fundraising pack Pay in your offline fundraising Swimming My Big Walkies #50MilesForAnimals Young people Young people Subscription Renewal Buttercup Farm 30DaysForAnimals Membership Membership Membership policy statement Events Events Local events One Fun Day Christmas Concert Howloween Great British Spring Clean Businesses Businesses Become a partner Our corporate partners Other ways companies can support What we do Main menuWhat we do What we do Strategy to 2030 Strategy to 2030 Getting justice for animals Ambitions End cruelty End cruelty Investigate cruelty Rescue animals Prevent suffering Prosecution Change the law Work internationally Care for animals Care for animals Rehabilitation Release Our wildlife centres Veterinary care Home for Life Financial assistance Education Education Children in school Young offenders At home Latest Latest News Our blog Publications The Dog Rescuers Jo Brand's Kitten Rescue Media contacts Adoptober RSPCA 2022 essay collection Animal Kindness Index 2022 Wilberforce Lecture Facts, figures and myths Who we are Who we are Governance Our branches Our executives High profile supporters Our history How we work How we work Our mission Policies RSPCA's rules Shop Main menuShop Shop Pet friendly holidays Pet friendly holidays Shop and donate Shop and donate Pet insurance Pet insurance Cat insurance Dog insurance Rabbit insurance Multi-pet insurance Product information FAQs Make a claim My RSPCA Main menu My RSPCA My account My account My pets My pets Sign in Sign in Your local RSPCA Your local RSPCA Report cruelty Donate Sponsor Share this... Find or call a vet Need to register your pet with a veterinary practice or call a vet for emergency advice? Heatstroke in dogs Emergency first aid advice for your dog if they're suffering from heatstroke. Common dog poisons Find out more about the most common, potentially serious, poisons that affect dogs. Looking after a puppy Dogs die in hot cars Dogs on hot walks Heatstroke Dog grooming Poisoning Common dog illnesses Caring for older dogs Vaccinations Dental care Adolescent puppies Dog first aid Ear cropping Hidden How we help In 2022 we investigated and closed 63,563 complaints of animal cruelty Get in touch Find your local RSPCA Contact us Report cruelty Our charity Media centre Science RSPCA Assured Education Follow us Or sign up for email updates © RSPCA 2023. All rights reserved. The RSPCA helps animals in England and Wales. Registered charity no.219099. Terms and conditions Site map National privacy notice Accessibility Modern slavery Contact us Jobs 

The UK’s Leading Provider of Online First Aid Training Practical Courses Online First Aid Courses All Online First Aid Courses Parents and Families Work Nannies Child Carers Health Professionals Schools, Nurseries, Children’s Activity Providers and Centres Sports Mental Health Community Groups About Us About Us FAQ Reviews In The Press Resources First Aid Blogs Published Books Free Online First Aid Courses Free First Aid Books Free Resources for Schools and Home Schooling Free online courses for pets and humans Contact Us Log In Log In 0 items First Aid Blogs Go Back 7 First Aid Tips that could save your dog’s life by Emma Hammett | Dogs First Aid, Uncategorized Learn to help your pet if they choke, stop breathing or have a serious injury. Our 7 First Aid Tips could save your dog’s life and reduce their pain and suffering in a medical emergency. Dogs are inquisitive creatures and have no concept of danger. They are always chewing on things they shouldn’t be eating, getting into unsafe situations or accessing places that are not safe for them to explore. Sometimes their curiosity leads to an emergency. There are many emergencies that may arise at home or out on a walk involving our pets. In those moments it is important to be fully prepared in order to act quickly and effectively – you could save their life. Everyday, pets at home eat toxic food or chemicals, injure themselves on something sharp, choke on something or run across a road to be hit by a car. It is vital that they receive prompt and appropriate first aid in any of those eventualities. Surprisingly few owners and pet carers are up to speed with pet first aid. Unfortunately, it is unlikely that the vet is available to help quickly enough in these urgent situations. Therefore, it is vital to have the proper knowledge and skills to react in these situations. Prompt and appropriate first aid can prevent a minor injury becoming a major one. It can reduce pain, improve outcomes and give you peace of mind that you can do the best for your pet. For many people their dog truly is their best friend so, should their canine companion need medical help, having the security of having completed a dog first aid course can prove to be invaluable. Learning first aid First Aid for Pets runs both online and practical courses that cover all the key aspects of dog first aid. For example how to care for an unconscious dog to commonly occurring injuries and illnesses such as choking, bleeding, fitting, poisoning and much more. The practical courses are run in small groups, with hands-on experience using a specially designed dog manikin and numerous other practical training aids. Many ‘pet parents’ benefit immensely from the courses, but they aren’t just for dog owners. First aid courses are an invaluable differentiator for those working in the in industry as dog-walkers or groomers, as they can be a great way to demonstrate your knowledge and skills in dog first aid to enhance your authority and encourage new and potential clients to feel confident trusting their pets to your care. First Aid for Pets was featured in the Times – click here to read an unbiased view of one of our courses Jeremy Paxman also raved about us! Recognising an emergency If you are worried, always call your vet for advice. A key point for first aid is learning to recognise an emergency. Here are some emergency situations where you should definitely take your dog to the vet: If they: aren’t breathing or are having difficulty breathing are unresponsive have collapsed and can’t get up are having a fit/seizure may have broken bones are having difficulty moving or coordinating movements may have eaten something toxic have been vomiting or passing diarrhoea for more than 24 hours. Click here to read our article on What the Vet Needs to know in an emergency Click here for a dog CPR first aid course Know your dog: Changes in behaviour such as change in appetite, bowel movements and even smell can indicate that there is something seriously wrong with your pet. Know the key indicators to look out for so that you can act quickly. Know how to check for a pulse: The easiest place to find the dog’s pulse is in the upper third of their thigh. Place your hand over the top of their thigh and gently squeeze your fingers just underneath their leg. You should be able to feel the artery pulsing at this point. Your thumb has a strong pulse itself so don’t use this to take their pulse, otherwise you will be timing your own pulse rate! Time the pulse for 15 seconds and then multiply the result by 4 in order to calculate the number beats per minute. Know how to help your choking dog: Choking occurs when something blocks the airway. When the airway is partially blocked a dog may start retching, pacing back and forth and pawing at their mouth. If their airway becomes totally blocked, they will be unable to make any sound at all. Dogs can choke on anything, from plastic bags, balls, socks, toys or anything they can get hold of, if it goes down the wrong way it may leave them unable to breathe. It is important that you spot these signs and then know how to act fast to dislodge the obstruction. Click here to read a guide on how to help your choking pet. We also have a Free course on how to help your choking dog Know how to administer CPR: If your dog has stopped breathing, call a vet straight away. You may need to perform CPR to increase your dog’s chances of survival. Click here to read how to give your pet CPR. We hope you’ll never need this advice, but it’s best to be prepared just in case. We also have a short online course on How to give your dog CPR Know how to muzzle your pet: Even the gentlest dog is likely to bite if it is frightened or in pain, so you should know how to make a makeshift muzzle for them as it will make it easier for you to safely help them. You should never muzzle an animal that is overheated (as they will need to pant to cool), that is having difficulty breathing or is likely to vomit. Click here to read a step by step guide as to how to create a comfortable and safe improvised muzzle for your pet. Finally being prepared for emergencies could save a pet’s life Keep your vet’s name, address and telephone number stored in your mobile phone, your landline, and kept in an address book or safe place around the home. Call your vet first. You’ll need to let them know there’s an emergency case on the way and follow any instructions you’re given e.g. if emergencies are seen on a different site. Keep a pen and paper handy to take down any important instructions from your vet. Always carry a pet first aid kit with you in case your pet needs your help. Click the image above to find out what you will learn on a Dog First Aid course. About us Written by Emma Hammett for First Aid for Life Award-winning first aid training tailored to your needs It is strongly advised that you attend a practical First Aid for Pets course or take our online course to understand what to do in a medical emergency. Please visit https://firstaidforlife.org.uk, https://www.firstaidforpets.net or call 0208 675 4036 for more information about our courses. First Aid for Life is a multi-award-winning, fully regulated first aid training provider. Our trainers are highly experienced medical, health and emergency services professionals who will tailor the training to your needs. Courses for groups or individuals at our venue or yours. First Aid for Pets provides this information for guidance. It is not in any way a substitute for veterinary advice. The author does not accept any liability or responsibility for any inaccuracies or for any mistreatment or misdiagnosis of any person or animal, however caused. 2 Comments Author: Emma Hammett First Aid Blogs Search for: Related Posts Blister Prevention and Treatment for All Runners and Sport Lovers by Emma HammettBlister Prevention and Treatment for All Runners and Sport Lovers Blister prevention and treatment: Blisters can be painful and lead to infections. Therefore it is really important to understand the best way to prevent and treat them. If you get a blister and... 7 Essential First Aid Skills all Carers Should Know by Emma HammettThese days, many of us have caring roles, both personally and professionally. There has been much talk in the press about the ‘sandwich generation’, where people in their 30s and 40s are now not only caring for their children but are caring for elderly parents too.... Why the recovery position saves lives by Emma Hammett When you are unconscious or unresponsive, most of your muscles relax and go floppy. Your tongue is a huge muscle attached to your bottom jaw and if you are unconscious and lying on your back, your tongue will flop back and block your airway and you won’t be... View Courses FollowFollowFollowFollow Sign Up For Our Newsletter Receive essential first aid tips and updates Success! First Name Last Name Email Subscribe Privacy Policy About Online First Aid Our courses are produced, continually updated and verified by a team of medical, health & emergency first aid professionals. FollowFollowFollowFollow Important Links HomeOnline CoursesFAQ’sTerms & ConditionsReturns & Refund PolicyPrivacy PolicyMedical Disclaimer Resources First Aid BlogsFirst Aid For LifeFirst Aid For PetsStay Safe SupportFree First Aid CoursesFree First Aid Books Contact 74 Ramsden Road,London SW12 8QZ0208 675 4036emma@firstaidforlife.org.uk © Online First Aid 2023 | All Rights Reserved - First Aid Online is Registered in England and Wales 08067073. VAT Registration 358041796 Website By Daniel & Joseph We use cookies on our website to give you the most relevant experience by remembering your preferences and repeat visits. By clicking “Accept All”, you consent to the use of ALL the cookies. However, you may visit "Cookie Settings" to provide a controlled consent.Cookie SettingsAccept AllManage consent Close Privacy Overview This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may affect your browsing experience. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. These cookies ensure basic functionalities and security features of the website, anonymously. CookieDurationDescriptioncookielawinfo-checkbox-analytics11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Analytics".cookielawinfo-checkbox-functional11 monthsThe cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Functional".cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessary11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookies is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".cookielawinfo-checkbox-others11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Other.cookielawinfo-checkbox-performance11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Performance".viewed_cookie_policy11 monthsThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data. Functional Functional Functional cookies help to perform certain functionalities like sharing the content of the website on social media platforms, collect feedbacks, and other third-party features. Performance Performance Performance cookies are used to understand and analyze the key performance indexes of the website which helps in delivering a better user experience for the visitors. Analytics Analytics Analytical cookies are used to understand how visitors interact with the website. These cookies help provide information on metrics the number of visitors, bounce rate, traffic source, etc. Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement cookies are used to provide visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns. These cookies track visitors across websites and collect information to provide customized ads. Others Others Other uncategorized cookies are those that are being analyzed and have not been classified into a category as yet. SAVE & ACCEPT 

Today's AvailabilityAbout UsServicesOur ServicesUrgent CarePreventive CareSurgeriesDentalsTelehealthTravel CertificatesLocationsBostonChicagoConnecticutD.C. AreaLong IslandNew JerseyNew York CityWestchesterToday's AvailabilityOpening SoonWe're HiringWorking at BondOpen PositionsBenefitsVeterinariansNursesMoreBlogMedical RecordsRefer a FriendSwag ShopCareersLog InLog InBOOK NOWOpen menuClose menuMarch 15, 2023First Aid for Dogs: A Guide to Basic Supplies and ProceduresfacebooktwitterShare via e-mailNo pet parent expects a medical emergency to happen. But if it does, you may find that being prepared can help you navigate the situation more calmly and confidently. First aid for dogs isn’t a substitute for veterinary care. However, it can help keep a dog as stable and comfortable as possible until they make it to the vet. It might even save a dog’s life.Here are some important things to know about dog and puppy first aid.Need a vet ASAP? BOOK NOW.What to Keep in Your Dog’s First Aid KitHere’s a list of commonly recommended items for first aid and emergency situations.Phone numbers and addresses of local emergency veterinarians and pet poison hotlines (ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center at 888-426-4435, or the Pet Poison Helpline at 855-764-7661). Instructions with pictures for what to do when a pet is choking, such as the external extraction technique (XXT) for objects stuck in the throat.Something that can be used to transport your pup to the vet. Depending on their size, this might mean a carrier, a large blanket, etc. Use a leash only if your dog can safely and comfortably walk.A muzzle for safety. A basket muzzle is best because it allows a dog to pant and breathe through their mouth. In a pinch, a strip of gauze can be tied around the muzzle.An Elizabethan collar to prevent your pet from licking a wound, removing a bandage, ingesting topical ointments, or ingesting toxic substances stuck that were spilled on their fur.A flashlight or headlamp.Latex or nitrile gloves.A pet thermometer, along with lubricant (KY jelly) for insertion if using a rectal thermometer.Instant cold packs for bruises and swelling.Tweezers for removing ticks or splinters.Saline eye wash.Tongue depressors.Styptic/blood clotting powder (especially for torn toenails).Wound cleaning and bandaging supplies.Appropriate liquids to flush and disinfect a wound. Chlorhexidine 2% and povidone iodine are good options, although both must be diluted. Don’t use hydrogen peroxide or alcohol to clean wounds as they can damage healthy tissues and delay healing (and alcohol stings!).Cotton balls and q-tips.Sterile gauze pads (including non-stick pads) and gauze roll.Bandaging tape. Don’t use human bandages or very sticky tape that could rip out your dog’s fur when removed.Self-adhesive vet wrap.Bandage scissors.Clean cloths or towels.Hydrogen peroxide 3% solution for inducing vomiting (but ONLY if your vet instructs you to do so). Vet-approved medications. Many medications are toxic for pets, so check with your veterinarian first for safe options and appropriate doses/formulations. One common inclusion is Benadryl (Diphenhydramine) for insect stings and allergic reactions.The same goes for topical medications like antibiotic ointments. Ask your vet about pet-safe options prior to including them in your first aid kit.Need a vet ASAP? Book a visit.Basic First Aid for DogsWhile different types of injuries and illnesses require their own specific steps, the following is a good overview of how to approach and assess a dog during a medical emergency.Step 1: Secure the DogBefore approaching an injured dog, check for safety concerns like oncoming traffic, downed power lines, etc. Ensure your own safety, because you won’t be able to help your pup if you get injured yourself.Dogs who are scared or painful might bite as a reflex, even if they’re normally friendly. Move slowly, speak soothingly, and avoid getting bitten when handling an injured pet.Be especially cautious when helping a dog you don’t know, since their rabies vaccination status is unknown.Step 2: Assess the Dog’s ConditionWhile not an exhaustive list, some conditions that warrant an emergency veterinary visit include being hit by a car, difficulty breathing, broken bones, bleeding that is excessive or won’t stop after applying pressure for 5-10 minutes, penetrating wounds into the chest or abdomen, and loss of consciousness.If a pet has a severe injury or condition, rushing straight to an emergency veterinarian is often better than wasting time trying to further assess the animal yourself. But in many cases, it’s hard to tell whether a dog requires urgent veterinary care or can be treated at home. Start by looking for any obvious abnormalities or concerning symptoms. You can also check your dog’s vital signs, including their temperature, heart rate, breathing rate, and gum color. Keep a chart of what’s normal for your dog’s size or breed, so you can recognize when things are abnormal.Step 3: Provide Emergency First AidIf you are comfortable in your assessment and first aid knowledge, take some steps to help the dog. Common examples are provided in the next section.Prepare to safely transport your dog to the vet. Keep them warm (unless they have heat stroke) with a thick blanket or towel. Place a muzzle (ensure your dog can still breathe well) to prevent dog bites, or wrap your dog in a thick blanket or towel for protection.Don’t move your dog more than absolutely necessary, especially if they’ve been hit by a car or you suspect a broken bone. Small dogs can be placed in a carrier or sturdy box. For larger dogs, try a makeshift stretcher using a strong board, sled, or even a thick blanket for carrying them.Step 4: Call the Vet to Let Them Know You’re On Your WayIf possible, it’s usually best to call your vet or an emergency veterinarian’s office BEFORE administering first aid, so they can give specific advice for your pet’s situation. Informing the vet team that you are coming also helps them prepare—so they can receive and treat your pup immediately.SEE ALSO: 9 Tips for Protecting Your Dog’s Paws in the WinterFirst Aid Procedures for Common Dog EmergenciesRemember that veterinary care is still needed. Home care is rarely a substitute for professional assessment and medical treatment. Each situation is unique. Use these as a general guideline for dog or puppy first aid.External Bleeding and Open WoundsSevere blood loss can be fatal. And even minor wounds are at risk of infection.Apply pressure with a clean cloth or gauze pad. If bleeding is copious or won’t stop after 5-10 minutes of consistent pressure, seek immediate veterinary care. Cover and protect the wound (and continue to apply pressure) on the way to the veterinary hospital with bandaging materials or a clean cloth.If bleeding has stopped and home care is appropriate for the size and severity of the injury, flush or clean the wound using supplies from your pet first aid kit. Gently dry the area, then apply gauze or bandaging material. Ensure wraps or bandages on the limbs aren’t so tight as to cut off circulation. Cleaning and wrapping may also be appropriate when veterinary care must be delayed (for example, if the injury occurred during a long trail hike).Internal BleedingInternal bleeding can be deadly but also difficult to recognize. Signs might include abdominal swelling, coughing up or vomiting blood, pale gums, weakness, or a weak and fast pulse. However, these symptoms could also indicate other health problems, many of which are equally serious.If you have any suspicion of internal bleeding, bring your pup to a vet right away. Try to keep them calm and quiet on the way.Road AccidentsSerious and fatal injuries are common when a pet is hit by a car. Even if you don’t see any obvious wounds, internal bleeding or other internal injuries may be present. Seek immediate veterinary care.Due to the risk of spinal injury, broken ribs, and broken bones, avoid moving your dog more than absolutely necessary. Find something sturdy on which to transport them.SeizuresTry to move any furniture or other objects your dog could collide with, and place a barrier to prevent falling down the stairs. Pets won’t swallow their tongue. Avoid placing your fingers in or near your dog’s mouth—accidental bites are common. Call your vet or an emergency vet for advice and to see if urgent care is needed. Most seizures stop on their own (while rare, one that doesn’t stop requires emergency care).Fractures and Broken BonesBroken bones are extremely painful. Avoid handling your dog more than necessary, transport them securely, and remember a painful pup might bite.Placing a splint is not advised in most cases. Splints can do more harm than good if not placed correctly, causing pain and creating additional complications.BurnsFor heat/thermal burns, run cold water over the area for a few minutes, or use a cold compress. For chemical burns, flush the area with running water for several minutes.Seek veterinary care. Burns are typically treated similarly to open wounds and are at risk of infection and pain.PoisoningIn some cases, inducing vomiting is recommended. In other cases—such as with sharp or caustic substances—vomiting could make things worse. So, don’t initiate vomiting unless your vet recommends it.Contact your veterinarian or a pet poison helpline right away. If possible, find the box or packaging for what your dog ingested, or a piece of the plant they ate, etc. This information will save time and allow more accurate treatment recommendations by helping a veterinarian identify the toxic substance.ChokingIf your dog can still breathe, keep them as calm as possible and seek emergency vet care. If you can easily see and remove the object at the top of the throat, go ahead and do so. But avoid this if the risks of pushing the object further down the throat, or being bitten by your pet, are too great.For dogs who can’t breathe at all or collapse, use the external extraction technique (XXT) or a modified Heimlich maneuver. Follow up with a veterinarian right away.Allergic ReactionsSevere allergic reactions and anaphylactic shock can be fatal. A few possible causes include vaccine reactions, insect bites or bee stings, or venomous snake bites. Anaphylaxis is life-threatening and requires immediate veterinary care. Clinical signs might include swelling of the face or muzzle, hives, sudden vomiting or diarrhea, difficulty breathing, or collapse. If you have a dose of Benadryl your vet has approved and you can safely administer it, this may help slow down the symptoms on your way to the vet.Vomiting and/or DiarrheaWhile a little upset stomach is usually not a cause for emergency care, severe vomiting and diarrhea can cause significant dehydration that can lead to death. Sometimes, significant blood loss also occurs.If there’s any doubt, call a veterinarian’s office to see if they recommend coming in. Keep plenty of clean drinking water available.Heat StrokeSymptoms might include lethargy/slowing down, excessive panting, difficulty breathing, restlessness, drooling, or collapse. Move your dog to a cooler spot (ideally air conditioning) immediately. Rinse them with cool (not cold) water. Use a fan for ventilation if possible. Take your dog to the vet right away.SEE ALSO: Aural Hematomas in DogsWhen and How to Perform Dog CPRMuch like human medical care, CPR in dogs begins with the ABCs.Airway: Check that the airway is open. Use a tongue depressor rather than your fingers in your dog’s mouth, and have good lighting. Try to remove any obstructions like vomit or foreign objects.Breathing: If your dog isn’t breathing, administer rescue breaths. Place their head and neck in a straight line. Place your hand over your dog’s muzzle. While holding their mouth shut, blow into the nostrils a few times. Watch for the chest to expand with each breath.Watch for a response. If your pet does not start breathing on their own, administer up to 20 breaths per minute.Cardiac function: Feel the chest just behind your pup’s elbow for a heartbeat. You can also learn to feel for a pulse on your dog’s inner thigh near the groin. If no heartbeat or pulse are detected and your pet isn’t breathing, you may begin chest compressions. Your dog should be lying on their right side. Press down on the widest, middle part of the rib cage at a rate of 100-120 compressions per minute, while pausing to administer a rescue breath approximately every 30 compressions. For small dogs, perform compressions using your thumb on one side of the chest and your fingers on the other. For medium or larger dogs, press on just the side of the chest that is facing up. Try to compress the chest wall 30-50%, allowing it to fully expand again between each compression.Unfortunately, most dogs who require CPR don’t survive, because of the extent of their underlying illness or injuries. However, in a pup who will otherwise pass away without CPR, there is no harm in trying. It might keep a pup alive long enough to get to the veterinary hospital for life-saving medical treatments.SEE ALSO: Dog Sedatives: When and How to Use ThemIdentifying Shock in DogsWhat is Shock?Shock means a dog’s blood flow to crucial organs is limited. It can be fatal very quickly, or cause permanent damage to body tissues and organs even if a pup survives. Examples of causes include severe blood loss, heart or lung disease, traumatic injuries, heatstroke, anaphylaxis, etc.Signs of ShockSymptoms may include rapid weak pulses, shallow or distressed breathing, pale gums, listlessness, collapse, or unconsciousness. Dogs might appear distressed or dazed.First Aid for ShockImmediate veterinary care is crucial! In the meantime, try to keep your dog warm (unless heatstroke is the cause) and calm. If breathing or heartbeats have ceased, CPR may be performed.While many of the injuries discussed here are very serious and can be fatal, knowledge (of what to look for and how to administer first aid) is power. Prompt care can help many beloved pets recover and continue living their best life with their favorite human.Have any questions? Schedule an in-person or telemedicine appointment. For urgent care, give us a call at our 24/7 BondAid helpline or come in right away. SEE ALSO: Traveling Internationally With Your DogYou Might Also LikePheromones for Dogs: What Are They & How Do You Use Them? Want a natural way to calm your nervous dog and reduce separation anxiety? Learn about the benefits of calming pheromones for dogs + how to use them! Read moreBond Vet & DIG Team Up for National Adopt A Dog MonthOctober is not just about falling leaves and pumpkin spice lattes; it's also National Adopt A Dog Month! This October, Bond Vet is teaming up with DIG, and together, they are on a mission to make this month extra special for pet lovers and rescue pups. By offering exciting discounts and incentives, we’re hoping to encourage pet adoption and support our local rescue community.Read moreThe Core Vaccines Your Pet NeedsWhen it comes to disease and illness, one of the best ways to protect your pet is through prevention. As with humans, your pet’s routine vaccines are a crucial way to help your pet stay healthy from their puppy/kitten years into adulthood.Read moreBetter care,Right when you need itBook a visitStay in touchGet the scoop about events, promotions, and clinic openings.Enter your emailSubmitinstagramfacebooklinkedintwitterPhone: (212) 430-8335General inquiries: team@bondvet.comPress inquiries: press@bondvet.comLocationsBostonChicagoConnecticutD.C. AreaLong IslandNew JerseyNew York CityWestchesterNavigationHomeAbout UsOur ServicesSurgeriesDentalsSpays & NeutersWe're HiringBlogEventsSwag ShopManage Medical RecordsReferralsTelehealthPreventive CareUrgent CareKittenPuppyFAQTelehealth DisclaimerCancellation PolicyPrivacy PolicyAccessibility© 2023 copyright all rights reserved 

Donate Menu Pet help & advice Donate What we do Get involved PDSA Pet Store Back Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Back Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give Back What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Back Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner Back PDSA Pet Store Get help Find us MyPDSA Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Pet help & advice Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Donate Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give What we do What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Get involved Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner PDSA Pet Store PDSA Pet Store Search Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Home Pet help and advice Looking after your pet All pets First Aid for pets Pet First Aid First Aid for pets Knowing what to do in an emergency can be the difference between life or death. Our vets' advice and downloadable first aid guide will help you deal with a range of common situations. First aid guide Download this page as a handy guide to print and keep Get your first aid guide Contents Common pet emergenciesBeing prepared for emergenciesWhat to do in an emergencyPet first aid kit Common pet emergencies Follow the links below for our vets’ first aid advice for the following situations: Bite wounds Read our vets' advice on first aid for bite wounds. First aid for bite wounds Bleeding Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet is bleeding. First Aid for bleeding Breathing problems Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet is struggling to breathe. First aid for breathing problems Broken bones Read our vets' first aid advice for broken bones. First aid for broken bones Bruises Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet has a bruise. First aid for bruises Burns Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet suffers a burn. First aid for burns Cat can't pee Read our vet's advice on what to do if your cat can't pee. First aid - cat can't pee Choking Read our vets' first aid advice for if your pet is choking. First aid for choking Collapse Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet collapses. First aid for collapse CPR Find out how to perform CPR on your pet. CPR for pets Cuts and grazes Read our vets' advice if your pet has a cut, graze or scratch. First aid for cuts and grazes Dog can't pee Read our vet's advice on what to do if your dog can't pee. First Aid - dog can't pee Electric shocks Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet is electrocuted. First aid for electric shocks Heatstroke Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet is suffering from heatstroke. First aid for heatstroke Hypothermia Read our vets' advice if your pet has hypothermia. First aid for hypothermia Insect stings and allergic reactions Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet has a reaction or has been stung. First aid for stings and allergic reactions Moving an injured pet Read our vets' advice on what to do if you need to move an injured pet. First aid to move an injured pet Poisons and toxins Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet eats something poisonous. First aid for poisons/toxins Road traffic accidents Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet is involved in a road traffic accident. First aid for RTAs Seizures Read our vets' advice on what to do if your pet has a seizure. First aid for fits/seizures Being prepared for emergencies Preparation can be the difference between life and death: Keep your vet’s number stored in your phone. Prepare a pet first aid kit for use at home and when you are out and about. What to do in an emergency When your pet has an emergency it can be hard not to panic. Try to stay calm, assess the situation, give your pet any necessary first aid, and call your vet. It’s helpful to remember the acronym: “Dr ABCs” Danger – keep yourself and others around you safe. Response – check if your pet responds to their name or touch. Airway – is their airway clear? Breathing – are they breathing? Circulation – do they have a pulse or heartbeat? Send – someone to ask for help! In an emergency your pet is likely to feel frightened and may react differently to normal, they may even bite. Try to keep your voice as calm as possible and make slow, gentle movements to reassure them. If you need to move your pet when they are injured, this needs to be done really carefully. Read our advice on how to move an inured pet safely. Pet first aid kit Every pet owner should own a first aid kit with the items needed to provide first aid for small injuries. If you travel with your pet, it’s a good idea to also have a smaller kit in your car or bag to provide any care needed while on the go. Once you have given your pet first aid, take them to your vet for a check-up as soon as possible. Your first aid kit should contain: Bandages Blunt-ended scissors Wound wash Cotton wool Tweezers Tick tweezers Wound dressing Self-adhesive tape Dressings Vinyl gloves Foil blanket Antiseptic wipes A blanket to use as a stretcher. You can stock up on first aid supplies on our online pet store. Video found at youtu.be/oNrlEU_2sjM First Aid kits Stock up your pet first aid kit on our online Pet Store. Start shopping Giving CPR to pets Find out when it's right to give CPR in pets and watch a video about how to do it safely. Read more First Aid guide Download this page as a handy guide to print and keep. Download now Get your free Pet First Aid guide! Would you know what to do if your pet was involved in an accident or stopped breathing? Download the guide × × QUICK LINKS What we do Contact Us Careers Press Office Blog LEGAL Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Modern Slavery © The People's Dispensary for Sick Animals. Registered charity nos. 208217 & SC037585 

Donate Menu Pet help & advice Donate What we do Get involved PDSA Pet Store Back Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Back Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give Back What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Back Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner Back PDSA Pet Store Get help Find us MyPDSA Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Pet help & advice Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Donate Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give What we do What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Get involved Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner PDSA Pet Store PDSA Pet Store Search Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Home Pet help and advice Pet Health Hub Other veterinary advice First aid for insect stings Pet Health Hub Search A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Emergency Appeal As a charity, we need your support more than ever. Your donations will help our vets provide life-saving care at this time of crisis. Donate now First Aid for allergic reactions and insect stings Contents OverviewWhat to do if your pet has an allergic reaction or is stung by an insect Overview Allergic reactions and insect stings are common in pets, especially in dogs. Most don’t cause a major problem, but some can be severe and even life threatening. If your pet is having an allergic reaction, they may develop swelling (commonly on the face), redness or a rash, and in more severe cases, difficulty breathing. Get vet help ASAP if your pet is showing signs of an allergic reaction What to do if your pet has an allergic reaction or is stung by an insect Step one: Check your pet Check for signs of a severe allergic reaction: Rapid swelling - often of the lips, eyes, ears and face Breathing difficulties If your pet has stopped breathing, read our CPR advice Vomiting or diarrhoea Collapse/ fainting Other signs of a less severe allergic reaction include: Skin rash/ bumps Mild swelling elsewhere on the body Drooling Limping if the legs or feet are affected Step two: For severe reactions Go straight to your vets if your pet is having difficulty breathing, or if their face/neck/throat is swelling up quickly. If possible, phone your vets on the way to let them know you are coming. Step two: For a mild reaction If your pet is suffering from a mild allergic reaction (no breathing problems or rapid swelling), call your vet for advice. They may need medication such as anti-histamines and other anti-inflammatories to keep them comfortable and stop their reaction getting worse. Published: October 2020 Did you find this page useful? Tell us more PDSA Staff ID Has this page helped you to care for your pet? Yes No Have you learnt something new from reading this page? Yes No Has this article helped you to understand when a vet is needed? Yes No Did you experience any of the following issues? Couldn’t watch the video There was too much text to read The text was too complicated / I didn’t understand the page Did you find the information that you wanted? Yes No What information were you looking for? Do you feel any information on this page is incorrect? Yes No What information do you feel is incorrect? Had you heard of PDSA before you came to this site? Yes No Which of the following best describes you? --- Please select --- Pet owner registered with a PDSA pet hospital or PDSA Pet Care practice Pet owner registered with a private vet Pet owner not yet registered with a vet PDSA employee Veterinary professional working/training outside of PDSA Just researching Other Please describe Any comments Please note, our vets and nurses are unable to respond to questions via this form. If you are concerned about your pet’s health, please contact your vet directly. Submit feedback Submitting Thank you for your feedback Want to hear more about PDSA and get pet care tips from our vet experts? Sign up to our e-newsletter Get your free Pet First Aid guide! Would you know what to do if your pet was involved in an accident or stopped breathing? Download the guide × Written by vets and vet nurses. This advice is for UK pets only. Illustrations by Samantha Elmhurst. × QUICK LINKS What we do Contact Us Careers Press Office Blog LEGAL Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Modern Slavery © The People's Dispensary for Sick Animals. Registered charity nos. 208217 & SC037585 

Donate Menu Pet help & advice Donate What we do Get involved PDSA Pet Store Back Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Back Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give Back What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Back Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner Back PDSA Pet Store Get help Find us MyPDSA Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Pet help & advice Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Donate Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give What we do What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Get involved Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner PDSA Pet Store PDSA Pet Store Search Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Home Get Involved Our Campaigns Free pet first aid guide Get your free Pet First Aid guide Would you know what to do if your pet was involved in an accident or stopped breathing? Our vets have put together a special Pet First Aid guide with handy tips, advice and steps to follow if you ever find yourself in this situation. The guide covers everything from heatstroke and traffic accidents to how to perform CPR and what you need inside your must-have pet first aid kit. Access your free guide here: PDSA Staff ID Your Details Title Please Select Mr Mrs Miss Ms Dr Ind Misc Mx Forename Surname Email Address Telephone Your address Find by postcode Find Address Or enter address manually Searching please wait... Select your address Building number/name(Optional) Address Line 1 Address Line 2 (Optional) Address Line 3 (Optional) Town County (Optional) Country United Kingdom Afganistan Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antigua & Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bonaire Bosnia-Herzegovina Botswana Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Islands Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo (Brazzaville) Congo (Kinshasa) Cook Islands Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Faeroe Islands Falkland Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibralter Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Holy See Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macau Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island North Korea Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territories Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Islands Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Réunion Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Barthélemy Saint Christopher & Nevis Saint Helena Saint Lucia Saint Martin Saint Pierre & Miquelon Saint Vincent & The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome & Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Sint Maarten Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia & The South Sandwish Islands South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad & Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks & Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United States United States Virgin Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Wallis & Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe × Using your personal information PDSA will never exchange or sell your information to another organisation for their own marketing purposes. As Data Controller PDSA will collect and use your personal information when you use or access our services, visit our websites, or help with our income generating activities. We only collect and use personal information necessary to fund and deliver our charitable veterinary services, and to carry out our associated legitimate business purposes such as direct marketing, business administration, and financial control. This may include talking to you about fundraising (such as appeals, competitions, commercial trading activities, events or sponsorships) and volunteering opportunities, or about pet insurance and animal welfare issues. In order to provide you with the best possible experience we will also use your personal information to help us decide what you may like to hear about and to personalise our communications and services. Based on the services you use, or support that you give, we will retain your personal information for a reasonable period of time. For more details on how we use and retain your personal information, your data protection rights, or to contact our Data Protection Officer please refer to our full privacy policy or call us to request your own copy. If you’d like to opt out of our marketing and fundraising communications, simply select the appropriate tick boxes on our website or call our friendly supporter services team on 0800 591248 to tell us your contact preferences. Close Protecting your personal data PDSA will never exchange or sell your information to another organisation for their own marketing purposes. PDSA would like to use your personal data to contact you about our work with sick and injured animals and to help us raise vital funds (Read more). If you’re happy to receive marketing and fundraising information in any of the following ways please check the relevant boxes. Email Yes No Mail Yes No SMS Yes No Phone Yes No Please refer to our full privacy policy for more details. Submit × QUICK LINKS What we do Contact Us Careers Press Office Blog LEGAL Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Modern Slavery © The People's Dispensary for Sick Animals. Registered charity nos. 208217 & SC037585 

Donate Menu Pet help & advice Donate What we do Get involved PDSA Pet Store Back Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Back Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give Back What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Back Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner Back PDSA Pet Store Get help Find us MyPDSA Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Pet help & advice Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Donate Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give What we do What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Get involved Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner PDSA Pet Store PDSA Pet Store Search Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Home Pet help and advice Pet Health Hub Medications First aid for bite wounds Pet Health Hub Search A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z First aid for bite wounds Contents OverviewWhat to do if your pet has been bitten Overview Always have your pet checked by your vet if they have been bitten or attacked. Bite wounds very often get infected because mouths are so full of bacteria. They also tend to be more serious than they look because of hidden damage below the skin. Snakebites are especially dangerous and should be treated ASAP. What to do if your pet has been bitten Step one: Assess your pet Do they seem otherwise OK? Do they have any other injuries? Are they in shock? If you are worried about your pet, cover their wounds, keep them warm and take them straight to your vets. Step two: Assess the bite wound Small and not bleeding - move to step three. Bleeding heavily - apply pressure with a dry, clean dressing and go straight to your vets. Areas of skin missing - cover the wound with a clean, dry dressing and go straight to your vets. If your pet seems painful when you try to cover the wound or you don’t have a dressing available then don’t try to cover the area as you may cause more damage. Snakebite - put an ice pack (wrapped in a towel) on the bite, and take your pet straight to the nearest vets. Step three: Flush the wound If your dog has a small bite wound that isn’t bleeding heavily, flush it with lukewarm, salty water* to remove as much bacteria as possible. Rinse for as long as your dog will tolerate. *Make salt water by adding 1 teaspoon of salt to a pint of cooled (previously boiled) water. Step four: Book an appointment with your vet Bite wounds should always be checked by a vet because they are often more serious than they look, and are likely to get infected. Make salt water by adding 1 teaspoon of salt to a pint of cooled (previously boiled) water. Click image to enlarge. Published: March 2020 Did you find this page useful? Tell us more PDSA Staff ID Has this page helped you to care for your pet? Yes No Have you learnt something new from reading this page? Yes No Has this article helped you to understand when a vet is needed? Yes No Did you experience any of the following issues? Couldn’t watch the video There was too much text to read The text was too complicated / I didn’t understand the page Did you find the information that you wanted? Yes No What information were you looking for? Do you feel any information on this page is incorrect? Yes No What information do you feel is incorrect? Had you heard of PDSA before you came to this site? Yes No Which of the following best describes you? --- Please select --- Pet owner registered with a PDSA pet hospital or PDSA Pet Care practice Pet owner registered with a private vet Pet owner not yet registered with a vet PDSA employee Veterinary professional working/training outside of PDSA Just researching Other Please describe Any comments Please note, our vets and nurses are unable to respond to questions via this form. If you are concerned about your pet’s health, please contact your vet directly. Submit feedback Submitting Thank you for your feedback Want to hear more about PDSA and get pet care tips from our vet experts? Sign up to our e-newsletter Get your free Pet First Aid guide! Would you know what to do if your pet was involved in an accident or stopped breathing? Download the guide × Written by vets and vet nurses. This advice is for UK pets only. Illustrations by Samantha Elmhurst. × QUICK LINKS What we do Contact Us Careers Press Office Blog LEGAL Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Modern Slavery © The People's Dispensary for Sick Animals. Registered charity nos. 208217 & SC037585 

Donate Menu Pet help & advice Donate What we do Get involved PDSA Pet Store Back Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Back Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give Back What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Back Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner Back PDSA Pet Store Get help Find us MyPDSA Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Pet help & advice Pet help & advice Our services Choosing a pet Looking after your pet Pet Health Hub PDSA Pet Insurance Your pet's symptoms Donate Donate Monthly donations One-off donations Gifts in Wills Sponsor our Trauma Care Donate in memory Goods donation Philanthropy Payroll Giving Other ways to give What we do What we do Why we're special PDSA Animal Awards Get PetWise Charity governance High profile supporters PDSA charity shops Meet our pet patients Education Centre PAW Report Get involved Get involved Fundraise Volunteer Win with PDSA Our campaigns Become a Corporate Partner PDSA Pet Store PDSA Pet Store Search Get help Find us MyPDSA Donate Home Pet help and advice Pet Health Hub Other veterinary advice First aid for collapsed pets Pet Health Hub Search A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Emergency Appeal As a charity, we need your support more than ever. Your donations will help our vets provide life-saving care at this time of crisis. Donate now First aid for collapsed pets Contents OverviewWhat to do if your pet has collapsed Check your pet's symptoms Print this page Overview Collapse can be caused by many different problems including: heart disease, low blood sugar, pain, breathing difficulties, Addison’s disease, blood loss and seizures. If your pet has collapsed, make sure they are safe, check them over and call your vet. What to do if your pet has collapsed Step one: Make sure they are safe Make sure your pet is in a cool, safe, quiet place. If necessary, use a blanket, board or towel to move them. Keep your pet calm by reassuring them in a soft voice. Step two: Check them over Check your pet and call your vet practice immediately if they are: Collapsed and not responding Not breathing - also start CPR Struggling to breathe Very pale (white/blue gums) Very painful or unable to move Developing a swollen belly If your pet seems to be coming round, calmly reassure them while they recover. Step three: Call your vet Call your vet for an emergency appointment if your pet doesn’t improve quickly or if they have any of the signs above. Even if your pet recovers quickly from their collapse, call your vet for advice afterwards. Your vet may want to check them over to understand why it happened. Published: March 2020 Did you find this page useful? Tell us more PDSA Staff ID Has this page helped you to care for your pet? Yes No Have you learnt something new from reading this page? Yes No Has this article helped you to understand when a vet is needed? Yes No Did you experience any of the following issues? Couldn’t watch the video There was too much text to read The text was too complicated / I didn’t understand the page Did you find the information that you wanted? Yes No What information were you looking for? Do you feel any information on this page is incorrect? Yes No What information do you feel is incorrect? Had you heard of PDSA before you came to this site? Yes No Which of the following best describes you? --- Please select --- Pet owner registered with a PDSA pet hospital or PDSA Pet Care practice Pet owner registered with a private vet Pet owner not yet registered with a vet PDSA employee Veterinary professional working/training outside of PDSA Just researching Other Please describe Any comments Please note, our vets and nurses are unable to respond to questions via this form. If you are concerned about your pet’s health, please contact your vet directly. Submit feedback Submitting Thank you for your feedback Want to hear more about PDSA and get pet care tips from our vet experts? Sign up to our e-newsletter Get your free Pet First Aid guide! Would you know what to do if your pet was involved in an accident or stopped breathing? Download the guide × Written by vets and vet nurses. This advice is for UK pets only. Illustrations by Samantha Elmhurst. × QUICK LINKS What we do Contact Us Careers Press Office Blog LEGAL Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Modern Slavery © The People's Dispensary for Sick Animals. Registered charity nos. 208217 & SC037585 

Skip to main content Header Menu Join/Renew Insurance Store Careers Search jobs Post a job Veterinary Career Center Work at AVMA Sign In Membership Membership Column 1 Join or renew Benefits of membership Membership FAQs New member resource center Sign in Directories Member directory Volunteer leaders AVMA staff leaders Get Involved Volunteer opportunities AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Donate to American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) Communities AVMA on social media Student AVMA (SAVMA) Allied groups International VMAs Advocacy Advocacy - Column 1 Advocacy National advocacy State & local issues International affairs Take Action Stay informed AVMA Congressional Advocacy Network (CAN) AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Get involved Top Priorities Add your voiceYour participation makes AVMA a stronger advocate for our profession. Here's where your voice is most needed right now. Education & Career Education/Career - Column 1 Veterinary studentTools to help you transition to your new veterinary career New veterinarianAnswers to the questions you're facing as you start out in your professional life Rising professionalEarly-career resources to continue your professional and personal growth Accreditation & certification AVMA Center for Veterinary Education Accreditation Foreign veterinary graduates (ECFVG) Veterinary specialties Education Accredited veterinary colleges Internships & externships Veterinary faculty resources K-12 educator resources AVMA COE upcoming site visits Continuing education (CE) CE overview Digital education (AVMA Axon) AVMA Convention Leadership development Leadership development overview Veterinary Leadership Conference Awards Jobs Veterinary Career Center Search jobs Post a job Career development webinars International opportunities Veterinary salary estimator Resources & Tools Resources & Tools Column 1 AVMA policiesProfessional policy guidance, open for member input multiple-users-1Diversity, equity, and inclusionCreating socially conscious work environments WellbeingSelf-care and workplace wellbeing for the whole veterinary team Practice managementProfitability and finance, marketing, leadership, and team building Personal financesLoans, budgets, financial planning, and more One HealthInterprofessional collaboration across animal, human, and environmental health Animal health & welfareDisease and pain management, behavior, disaster preparedness, humane endings, and more Journals & research AVMA journals Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association (JAVMA) American Journal of Veterinary Research (AJVR) Animal Health Studies Database Veterinary economics Reports & statistics Literature reviews Public resources Pet owners K-12 educators Events Featured events AVMA ConventionGet best-in-class CE in some of your favorite cities. There’s no better place to network, learn, and meet up with the friends and colleagues who make veterinary medicine so rewarding. Veterinary Leadership ConferenceThe Veterinary Leadership Conference draws veterinarians from across the U.S. for education sessions that help develop leaders for the veterinary profession. Summits & symposiumsAttend topical CE meetings on subjects including animal welfare, wellbeing, economics, and public policy. Calendar of events Future meeting dates Awareness events Featured events Veterinary Business and Economic ForumOctober 24-25 Animal Welfare Assessment ContestNovember 17-19 News Featured news AVMA@Work blogStay current on important veterinary news, AVMA activities, and member services. AVMA NewsRead the latest news about the AVMA and the veterinary profession, and search archives dating back to 2000. NewslettersGet the latest updates on your choice of veterinary topics delivered straight to your inbox. Recalls & alertsKeep track of product alerts for pet foods, animal feed, and products used by veterinarians or animal owners. Publications AVMA journals Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association (JAVMA) American Journal of Veterinary Research (AJVR) Reports Newsletters Media relations Press releases Leadership bios Media guide Media contacts Follow us AVMA on social media Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Instagram YouTube Podcasts RSS About AVMA Information We are AVMA Vision, mission & values History AVMA staff leadership Strategic planning Partnerships Annual report Awards Careers at AVMA AVMA Family American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) AVMA LIFE AVMA PLIT AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Student AVMA (SAVMA) Organization How we work Board of Directors House Advisory Committee House of Delegates State & allied groups Bylaws Contact Contact us Media contacts Membership Directories Member directory Volunteer leaders AVMA staff leaders Membership information Join or renew Benefits of membership Membership FAQs New member resource center Sign in Get involved Volunteer opportunities AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Donate to American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) Communities AVMA on social media Student AVMA (SAVMA) Allied groups International VMAs Advocacy Advocacy areas Advocacy National advocacy State & local issues International affairs Take action Stay informed AVMA Congressional Advocacy Network (CAN) AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Get involved Top priorities Add your voice Education & Career Career stages Veterinary student New veterinarian Rising professional Accreditation & certification AVMA Center for Veterinary Education Accreditation Foreign veterinary graduates (ECFVG) Veterinary specialties Education Accredited veterinary colleges Internships & externships Veterinary faculty resources K-12 educator resources AVMA COE upcoming site visits Continuing education (CE) CE overview Digital education (AVMA Axon) AVMA Convention Leadership development Leadership development overview Veterinary Leadership Conference Awards Jobs Veterinary Career Center Search jobs Post a job Career development webinars International opportunities Veterinary salary estimator Resources & Tools AVMA Policies Search Resources Resource categories AVMA policies Diversity, equity, and inclusion Wellbeing Practice management Personal finances One Health Animal health & welfare Journals & research AVMA journals Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association (JAVMA) American Journal of Veterinary Research (AJVR) Animal Health Studies Database Veterinary economics Reports & statistics Literature reviews Public resources Pet owners K-12 educators Events AVMA events AVMA Convention Veterinary Leadership Conference Summits & symposiums Calendar of events Future meeting dates Awareness events Featured events Veterinary Business and Economic Forum Animal Welfare Assessment Contest News Featured AVMA@Work blog AVMA News Newsletters Recalls & alerts Publications AVMA journals Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association (JAVMA) American Journal of Veterinary Research (AJVR) Reports Newsletters Media relations Press releases Leadership bios Media guide Media contacts Follow us AVMA on social media Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Instagram YouTube Podcasts RSS About AVMA information We are AVMA Vision, mission & values History AVMA staff leadership Strategic planning Partnerships Annual report Awards Careers at AVMA AVMA family American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) AVMA LIFE AVMA PLIT AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Student AVMA (SAVMA) Organization How we work Board of Directors House Advisory Committee House of Delegates State & allied groups Bylaws Contact Contact us Media contacts Join/Renew Insurance Store Careers Site search Breadcrumb Home Pet owners First aid tips for pet owners First aid tips for pet owners Do you know what you would do if your dog ate some chocolate? What if your cat had a seizure? What if your pet was overheating on a hot summer day, or fell down the stairs and started limping? Knowing some basic first aid information and being prepared for emergencies can help you avoid the feelings of panic that may accompany these situations. First aid care is not a substitute for veterinary care, but it may save your pet’s life until you can get them veterinary care. In case of an emergency, call your veterinarian or local veterinary emergency hospital so they can be ready when you arrive. When traveling with your pet, consider bringing a simpler, travel-sized version of the pet first aid kit you keep at home, and have the phone numbers of your veterinarian, the national animal poison control hotline (888-426-4235), and a 24-hour emergency veterinary hospital in the area where you will be visiting. When traveling without your pet, be sure to consider who's in charge while you're away and what they'll need to keep your pet safe and healthy. For your safety An injury may not only cause your pet pain, but also fear and confusion. These things can make even the gentlest of pets unpredictable or even dangerous. To protect you both: Avoid any attempt to hug an injured pet. Keep your face away from your pet’s mouth. Apply a muzzle if your pet threatens to bite. Whenever possible, ask other people to help you move your pet. Remember: Any first aid administered to your pet should be followed by immediate veterinary care. First aid care is not a substitute for veterinary care, but it may save your pet's life until it receives veterinary treatment. Get the brochure Keep first aid information on hand, whether at home or in the clinic. Download Also in Spanish: Primeros Auxilios para Mascotas If your pet is poisoned or exposed to toxins Poisoning is a pet emergency that causes a great deal of confusion for pet owners. In general, any products that are harmful for people are also harmful for pets. Examples include cleaning products, rodent poisons, and antifreeze. But you also need to be aware of common food items, plants, and other substances that may be harmful to your pet. See common household hazards that may pose a danger to your pet Check the label If your pet's skin or eyes are exposed to a toxic product (such as many cleaning products), check the product label for the instructions for people exposed to the product. If the label instructs you to wash your hands with soap and water if you're exposed, then wash your pet's skin with soap and water (don't get any into their eyes, mouth, or nose). If the label tells you to flush the skin or eyes with water, do this for your pet as soon as possible (if you can do it safely), and immediately call a veterinarian. Get help If you know your pet has swallowed or had contact with something that may be harmful, or if the animal is having seizures, losing consciousness, unconscious, or having difficulty breathing, call your veterinarian, emergency veterinary clinic, the Animal Poison Control Center hotline (888-426-4435), or Pet Poison Helpline (855-764-7661) immediately. A consultation fee may apply for hotline/helpline calls. If possible, have the following information available: Species, breed, age, sex, weight and number of animals involved Symptoms Name/description of the substance in question; amount the animal was exposed to; and how long it's been since your pet ate it or was exposed to it Product container/packaging Collect any material your pet may have vomited or chewed, and place it in a plastic sealable bag to take with you when you bring your animal in for veterinary treatment. add If your pet is injured, bleeding, or bitten Fractures Gently lay your pet on a flat surface for support. If possible and safe, try to stabilize the injury by bandaging or splinting it before moving your pet. Since a poorly applied bandage or splint can do more harm than good, leave this step to the veterinarian if you’re uncertain. While transporting your injured pet to a veterinarian, keep them confined in a small area to reduce the risk of additional injury. Pet carriers work well, or you can use a box or other container (but make sure your pet has enough air). For large dogs, use a board, sled, blanket, or something similar to act as a stretcher. Internal bleeding Signs of internal bleeding include bleeding from nose, mouth, or rectum; coughing up blood; bloody urine; pale gums; collapse; and a weak and rapid pulse. Keep your pet as warm and quiet as possible. Immediately take your pet to the closest veterinary hospital. External wounds Use a clean cloth or towel to apply firm pressure directly over the bleeding site. Avoid checking to see if the bleeding has stopped until you’ve applied pressure for at least three minutes. If the bleeding is severe, immediately take your pet to the closest veterinary hospital. If you see blood soaking through the applied towel/cloth, do not remove it. Instead, add towels on top of previous layers to avoid disturbing any blood clots that might have formed. Burns Flush the burn with room temperature water. This process may be painful so take appropriate precautions, such as applying a muzzle, to avoid being scratched, bitten, or otherwise injured. Cover the burned area with towels dampened with room temperature water. Seek immediate veterinary care. Eye injuries Eye injuries are painful and can quickly worsen, becoming a threat to your pet’s sight. If you can see something in your pet’s eye, such as a piece of dirt or grass, try using saline solution to gently flush out the object. Avoid trying to grab the object with a tool or your fingers. Prevent your pet from rubbing the eye with their paws or against objects, such as furniture, carpeting, or you. Immediately seek veterinary care. Snake bites Assume the snake is poisonous. Seek veterinary care immediately. Try to identify the snake or take a picture of it, if this can be done while remaining out of reach. Do not try to capture or kill the snake. Do not bring the snake into the veterinarian’s office—a photograph will do. add If your pet has heatstroke or goes into shock Heatstroke Signs of heatstroke include rapid breathing/heavy panting, excessive drooling, weakness or drowsiness, confusion, vomiting or diarrhea, and abnormally colored, dry or sticky gums. Take your pet to the closest veterinary hospital as soon as possible, and begin cooling them right away. If your pet is in direct sunlight, move them to a shaded area or comfortably cool indoor environment. Place towels wetted with room-temperature water gently around your pet’s neck, in the armpits, and in the groin area. Rewet and replace the towels every few minutes. Avoid putting your pet in a tub of cool or cold water, which can make their condition worse. If a fan is available, use it to directly blow cool air onto your pet. Shock Signs of shock include a weak pulse, shallow breathing, nervousness, and dazed eyes. This usually follows severe injury or extreme fright. Keep your pet restrained, warm, and quiet. If your pet is unconscious, keep their head level with rest of body. Immediately take your pet to the closest veterinary hospital. add If your pet is having a seizure Keep your pet away from any objects (including furniture) that might hurt them. Do not try to restrain the pet, or startle them out of the seizure. Avoid placing your hands in or near your pet’s mouth. Time the seizure with a watch. After the seizure has stopped, keep your pet as warm and quiet as possible and contact your veterinarian or local emergency hospital. Immediately take your pet to a veterinarian if the animal has had any of the following: Two or more seizures in a 24-hour period A seizure that lasts longer than 5 minutes Seizure activity that doesn’t stop add If your pet is choking Choking pets have difficulty breathing, paw a lot at their mouths, make choking sounds when breathing or coughing, and may have blue-tinged lips and/or tongue. If your pet can still breathe, try to keep them calm and immediately seek veterinary care. If possible without risking injury, open your pet’s mouth and look inside for foreign objects. If you see an object, gently try to remove it by using two hands to open the mouth, then using your fingers to grasp and remove the object. The flat side of a spoon may be used to pull the object closer, if needed. Be careful not to push the object further down the throat. For cats and small dogs, if the object can’t be removed with fingers, gently pick up your pet by their thighs and swing the animal in the air from side to side. If that doesn’t help to dislodge the object, apply forward pressure to the pet’s abdomen just behind the ribcage. For larger dogs, if the object can’t be removed with fingers, try the Heimlich maneuver. If your large dog is standing, place your arms around their belly, just like you would a person, and make a fist with your hands. Place your fist on the soft spot under their ribcage, then push up and forward. If the dog is lying down, place one hand on their back and use the other hand to squeeze the abdomen upward. add If your pet is not breathing Stay calm Open your pet’s mouth, gently grasp the tongue, and pull it forward so the tip is outside the mouth. Quickly check the mouth and throat for any foreign objects blocking the airway. Perform rescue breathing by holding your pet’s mouth closed with your hand and breathing directly into their nose until you see their chest expand. Once the chest expands, continue providing 10 rescue breaths per minute until your pet is breathing on their own or you arrive at the closest veterinary hospital. add If your pet has no heartbeat Start rescue breathing as described for non-breathing pets, then begin chest compressions: For cats and most dogs, gently lay the pet on one side. For barrel-chested dogs (like English Bulldogs), gently lay them on their back and place your hands on their breastbone. For small dogs and cats, use one hand to encircle the bottom of the chest between your thumb and other fingers. Then, squeeze the chest between your thumb and fingers 100-120 times per minute (or to the beat of “Stayin’ Alive”). For other dogs, place your hands over the widest point of the chest or, if the dog is keel-chested (like Greyhounds or Doberman Pinschers), just behind the armpit. Then press down 100-120 times per minute, keeping your elbows locked. Aim to compress the chest cavity by about one-third of its total width. If you’re alone, alternate the chest compressions with rescue breaths by performing 30 chest compressions and stopping long enough to give two rescue breaths, then repeating. If you have help, one person can give chest compressions and the other can give 10 rescue breaths per minute. Continue until you can hear and feel a heartbeat and your pet is breathing regularly, or you have arrived at the closes veterinary hospital, and they can take over. Please remember that your pet's likelihood of surviving with resuscitation is very low. However, in an emergency it may give your pet its only chance. add First aid kit for pets Keep a kit of basic first aid supplies for the pets in your household. Many items in a family first aid kit can be used for pets, too. Your veterinarian may recommend additional items for your kit based on your pet’s medical condition. Important phone numbers (veterinarian, emergency hospital, poison control, animal control, nonemergency police) A copy of your pet’s medical record, including any medications your pet is receiving Digital thermometer to take your pet’s temperature Muzzle to prevent bites (DO NOT muzzle your pet if they are vomiting.) Spare leash and collar Gauze roll for wrapping wounds or muzzling an injured animal Clean towels for restraining cats, cleaning, or padding Nonstick bandages or strips of clean cloth to control bleeding or protect wounds Self-adhering, nonstick tape for bandages Adhesive tape for securing bandages Scissors with blunt ends for safely cutting bandage materials Disposable gloves to protect your hands Small flashlight for examining eyes, wounds, etc. Tweezers to remove small foreign objects Eye dropper (or large syringe without needle) to give oral treatments or flush wounds Sterile lubricating jelly to protect wounds/eyes Activated charcoal to absorb poison (Use only if instructed to do so by your veterinarian or a poison control center.) 3% hydrogen peroxide to induce vomiting (Always contact your veterinarian or poison control center before inducing vomiting. Do not give more than one dose unless otherwise instructed by your veterinarian. Do not use hydrogen peroxide on wounds.) Saline solution for cleansing wounds or flushing eyes (Saline solution sold for use with contact lenses works well for most purposes.) Pets and disasters Be prepared to take care of pets and other animals, especially during disasters such as fire, flood, or other emergencies. Be prepared Emergency contact cards Download emergency contact cards for pets and livestock. Download Additional resources Pet First Aid (American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA)/Healthy Pet) Basic First Aid for Your Pet (The University of Illinois College of Veterinary Medicine) First Aid for Pets (American Red Cross) First Aid and Emergency Care (VeterinaryPartner.com) Footer: AVMA Family The AVMA Family American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) AVMA LIFE AVMA PLIT AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Student AVMA (SAVMA) American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) AVMA LIFE AVMA PLIT AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Student AVMA (SAVMA) Footer menu Contact us Work at AVMA Privacy policy Terms of use Sitemap Social Media Follow Us Subscribe to Newsletters © 2023 American Veterinary Medical Association All rights reserved 

Skip Navigation Where To Buy Sign Up & Save For Dogs FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint For Cats FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Learn Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Contact Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Skip Navigation For Dogs For Cats Learn Contact FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Where To Buy Sign Up & Save Home Dog Care: What's New? Healthcare Dog First Aid Tips for a Variety of Injuries | Hill's Pet First Aid Tips for Your Dog tags Dog healthcare Published by min read Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Find food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Shop All Cat Food Find a dog food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Find a cat food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Cat Food Hopefully your dog will never seriously hurt himself, but having high energy levels, he's bound to get into a few scrapes now and then, so it's useful to have knowledge of basic first aid. First Aid Box You should always keep a few basic items on hand for emergencies such as: cotton bandages; cotton wool or lint to clean wounds; mild pet-friendly antiseptic to wash wounds; and a pair of tweezers for removing stings or objects from the mouth. Bones, Sticks and Balls Bones, sticks and balls can get lodged in or across the roof of a dog's mouth. If this happens, you may notice your dog pawing at his mouth or struggling to close his jaws. You may be able to remove the object by hand or with tweezers, but if not you'll need to get your vet to do so using sedation. As always, prevention is better than a cure, so never let your dog play with small balls and avoid throwing sticks. Burns If your dog suffers a burn from hot water, oil, chemicals or ice, he'll need immediate attention. Minor burns can be treated at home - simply clean the affected area with a mild antiseptic and apply a soothing cream or gel such as aloe vera. Severe burns will need veterinary attention, so take your dog to the vet straight away. Cuts and Wounds Dogs may suffer from cuts or wounds particularly to their feet if they run on something sharp like broken glass. If this occurs, clean the affected area with a disinfectant and apply a bandage if necessary. Consult your vet if you cannot stop the bleeding or the wound is severe. Dog bites If your dog is unlucky enough to be bitten by another dog, it's always worth getting him checked over by the vet. Make a routine appointment if the bite or bites are minor, and ensure your pet is seen as an emergency if they're severe. This approach should be taken with all animal bites. You should immediately call your vet if your suspect your dog has been bitten by a wild or stray animal to rule out servious diseases such as rabies. Ear problems Your dog's ears should be a shiny, pale pink color inside and free from wax or discharge. They should not smell unpleasant. If you suspect an ear problem always consult a vet. Eye problems If your dog has any problems with his eyes such as a scratch or conjunctivitis you should consult your vet, and if you can, prevent him from rubbing his eye. Fits A fit can be recognized by sudden, uncontrolled spasmodic movements, often with chomping of the jaw and salivating. A fitting dog will usually fall onto its side and be unaware of its surroundings. If your dog does have a fit, try not to restrain him. Instead, remove any furniture or hard objects around him that could cause an injury. Then, turn off all stimuli such as lights, radio, television, washing machine etc. and darken the room so he can recover quietly. You should ALWAYS consult your vet if your dog has a fit. Fractured or pulled-off claws These can be very painful and tend to become quickly infected. Bleeding is also often profuse. If possible, try to apply a bandage to the foot before taking your dog to the vet as antibiotics are often required and the claw may need to be clipped back under sedation or anesthetic. Heatstroke The best advice as far as heatstroke is concerned is that prevention is better than a cure. Ensure your dog doesn't stay out in the sun for too long on hot days and avoids the midday heat. If he does get mild heatstroke, cool him down as best you can with wet towels or a fan, and ensure he drinks plenty of cool water and gets lots of rest. Serious heatstroke will require the attention of a vet. Lameness If your dog is in obvious pain and can't put any weight on his leg, you should take him to your vet immediately as he may have a fracture or worse. In less severe cases, look for damaged nails and check the pad for thorns, embedded grit or cuts. Poisoning Some dogs are very inquisitive, and there's always the possibility your dog will get hold of something he shouldn't. Much like heatstroke, prevention is better than a cure and you need to dog-proof your home to ensure he can't access things that could be harmful to his health, such as slug pellets, bleach or chocolate. If you suspect your dog has digested something harmful, always take the packaging to your vet as this will help identify the problem and source an antidote. If the worst does happen, see your vet as an emergency. Vehicular Accidents If your dog has been involved in an accident with a vehicle, you should call your vet right away. Your dog may be in shock and could react unpredictably so approach him with caution. If possible, lift your dog onto a blanket then take him to the vet as quickly as you can. If he cannot be moved, you may have to ask your vet to come directly to the scene. Stings and Insect Bites If your dog has been stung and has severe swelling around his mouth, nose or throat that's causing breathing difficulties, you should get him to a vet immediately. If the sting or bite isn't causing any serious problems, you can alleviate your dog's discomfort by applying a cold compress to the affected area. Hopefully your dog will never seriously hurt himself, but it never hurts to be prepared just in case. Much like with a child, it is always a good idea to keep a first aid kit at home to help clean and bandage wounds when necessary. If injured, try to keep your dog calm by talking to him in a soothing tone letting him know he'll be okay. Related Articles Related Products Related Articles What Human Food Does to Your Pet: Human Caloric Equivalents Understand what effect feeding your pet table scraps really has on their daily caloric intake with this easy to understand human equivalent chart. Understand Your Pet's Body Condition Score Monitoring your pet’s body condition score (BCS) can help you help your pet maintain proper growth and weight for a long, healthy life. Cancer in Dogs: Causes, Diagnosis & Treatments Learn about the symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of cancer and tumors in dogs, providing pet owners with valuable information and resources when dealing with canine cancer. Things to Know About Kidney Disease in Dogs Kidney disease and renal failure can kill your dog. Know these 4 facts about canine kidney disease, the symptoms to look for, and when to call your vet. Related products Hill's Science Diet Adult Large Breed Chicken & Barley Recipe Dog Food Supports healthy joints, immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful coat Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Small & Mini Savory Stew with Chicken & Vegetables Dog Food A delicious complement to the nutrition of <span class='nowrap'>Science Diet</span> Small Paws™ dry dog food Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Small Paws Savory Stew with Beef & Vegetables Dog Food A delicious complement to the nutrition of <span class='nowrap'>Science Diet</span> Small Paws™ dry dog food Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Large Breed Lamb Meal & Brown Rice Recipe Dog Food Supports healthy joints, immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful coat Buy Now » Our Brands Prescription Diet Science Diet Browse By Age For Dogs Puppy Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) For Cats Kitten Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) Education Cat Articles And Tips Dog Articles and Tips Nutritional Philosophy About Hill's Our Company Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Careers Create or Manage a Business Account Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Shelter Partners Natural Disaster Support United States [English] (opens a modal dialog) FacebookTwitterPinterestInstagramYoutube Hillsvet.com Site Map Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Do Not Sell My Personal Information ©2021 Hill's Pet Nutrition, Inc. As used herein, denotes registered trademark status in the U.S. only; registration status in other geographies may be different. Your use of this site is subject to the terms of our Legal Statement. About our Ads. Cookie Consent Tool PLEASE SELECT YOUR PREFERRED LOCATION AND LANGUAGE Argentina Australia Austria - Österreich Беларусь Belgium - België Belgium - Belgique Belize Bolivia Brazil - Brasil България Canada (English) Canada (Français) Chile Colombia Costa Rica Croatia - Hrvatska Cyprus - English Cyprus - Greek Czech Republic - Česká Republika Denmark - Danmark Dominican Republic - República Dominicana Ecuador Eesti Finland - Suomi France - France Грузия Germany - Deutschland Greater China - Hong Kong SAR Greater China - Hong Kong SAR – (English) Greater China - Taiwan Greece - Ελλάδα Guatemala Honduras Magyarország India Indonesia Ireland ישראל Italy - Italia 日本 Latvia - Latvija Lietuva Malaysia (Bahasa) México Netherlands - Nederland New Zealand Nicaragua Norway - Norge Panamá Paraguay Peru Philippines (English) Poland - Polska Portugal Puerto Rico (English) Puerto Rico (Español) 대한민국 Republic of Singapore (English) România Russia - Россия Srbija Slovensko Slovenija South Africa Spain - España Sweden - Sverige Switzerland (Suisse) Switzerland (Schweiz) Svizzera Thailand - ไทย Turkey - Türkiye United Kingdom Ukraine - Україна United Arab Emirates (English) United States Uruguay Venezuela 

About Petplan Help & Contact How to Claim Log in/Register Trustpilot Toggle navigation Trustpilot Pet Insurance Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Rabbit Insurance Multipet Insurance Other Pet Insurance Insurance guides Pet Advice Dog Advice Puppy Advice Dog Breeds Cat Advice Kitten Advice Rabbit Advice Meet our experts Rehoming a Pet About Petplan Help & Contact How to Claim Log in/Register Get a quote Home Pet Advice Dog Essential first aid for your dog Essential first aid for your dog Approved by Brian Faulkner Veterinary SurgeonRSVS Registered Share the article Share via Email Share on LinkedIn Share via whatsapp Share on X Share on Facebook Share the article Share via Email Share on LinkedIn Share via whatsapp Share on X Share on Facebook From small injuries to more serious accidents, it’s a good idea to know some basic first aid for your dog. Petplan veterinary expert Brian Faulkner shares some tips for how you can keep your furry friend as comfortable as possible while you wait to see your vet. Dogs are known for their enthusiasm but sometimes, this can get them in trouble. If your dog gets injured, it’s always important to seek professional vet treatment as soon as possible. But it’s also a good idea to know some basic dog first aid techniques that you can use immediately after an accident. What can I do if my dog is bleeding? Dogs can often end up with punctures to their paw pads, cuts, and torn claws. If you notice your dog is bleeding, try to see where the blood is coming from. Is it a minor scrape or a more serious deep cut? Apply firm pressure over the injury using a clean bandage. If you don’t have one to hand, a clean handkerchief or tea towel will do the same job. If you have a basic human or dog first aid kit, you can wrap some tape around the bandage to keep it secure before you see the vet. This also helps to keep the wound as clean as possible and reduce further bleeding. What can I do if my dog has broken a bone? Sometimes, you might notice your dog is moving with difficulty or showing signs of pain. These behaviours can indicate they’re hurt and one reason can be a broken bone. Other times, in the case of a compound fracture, you’ll see the bone has broken through the skin. In the case of a compound fracture, you might be able to apply a loose bandage to keep the area clean, but don’t try to apply a splint or give your dog any medication, like aspirin, that you may have at home. What can I do if my dog is choking? While it’s relatively rare for dogs to choke, they can sometimes get small items trapped in the back of their throat. In this instance, don’t put your hand in your dog’s mouth to try and pull the object out. It can be hard to get a good grip and your dog’s bite reflex may result in you getting hurt, too. Instead, place your thumbs behind your dog’s jaw, towards their collar, and gently but firmly push upwards towards their chin. This helps you push from behind the obstruction and the pressure is often enough to dislodge the object. If this doesn’t work, take your dog to the vet as soon as possible. Don’t be tempted to try the Heimlich manoeuvre as dogs don’t really have the right body shape for this to work. There’s a danger you may break their bones and cause damage to their organs, or get bitten. What can I do if my dog has stopped breathing? You’ll usually be able to see your dog’s ribcage rise and fall as they breathe but if you can’t, it can be worrying. One way to check their breathing is to place a cold mirror or glass in front of your dog’s nose. You should see condensation form as they breathe out. If your dog has stopped breathing, and you can’t feel their heart beating, place them in the sternal position shown below, call your vet for an urgent appointment and rush them straight there. What can I do if my dog has collapsed? If your dog has collapsed, call your vet immediately. They will likely advise an urgent appointment. Performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) at home on dogs isn’t always recommended because it can end up either breaking their bones or puncturing their organs. Instead, place your dog in the sternal position shown above. Place them on their stomach with their front paws in front of them. This helps to straighten their airways and allows their ribcage to move freely, both of which can help air to flow in and out of their lungs more easily. While you wait for vet support, take a look around and see if there’s anything that caused your dog to collapse. Eating poisonous food like chocolate, onions, or even peanut butter containing xylitol can make your dog very sick. What can I do if I can’t feel my dog’s heartbeat? A dog’s heart is positioned low and forwards in their chest. To check your dog’s pulse, place your fingers on either side of the rib cage, between the front legs. When you apply gentle pressure, you should be able to feel their heartbeat. This can be more difficult with certain deep-chested breeds, like Bulldogs, or overweight dogs. If you can’t feel a heartbeat, place your dog in the sternal position described above and take them to the vet urgently. From minor cuts to a serious injury from a road traffic accident, it can be scary when our dogs get hurt. If you’re ever worried that your dog is injured or unwell, it’s always best to take them to the vet as soon as possible. In the meantime, though, it’s always worth knowing some basic first aid for dogs to help your dog stay as comfortable as possible while you wait for professional advice. Last updated: February 08, 2023 Rate this article: Share via Email Share on LinkedIn Share via whatsapp Share on X Share on Facebook Share this article: Back to top Newest articles Pet Insurance Quote Dog Insurance Quote Cat Insurance Quote Rabbit Insurance Quote Retrieve my Quote Petplan vet Petplan Business Allianz FAQs Pet Insurance Dog Insurance Cat and Kitten Insurance Rabbit Insurance Horse Insurance Terms and conditions Privacy and Legal Accessibility Complaints Press Enquiries Dog Care Cat Care Rabbit Care Dog Breeds Cavapoo Cockapoo Cocker Spaniel Golden Retriever Shiba Inu Cat Breeds Bengal Maine Coon Norwegian Forest Cat Ragdoll Siberian Follow us on Instagram Follow us on X Like us on Facebook Watch us on Youtube Follow us on TikTok Petplan is a trading name of Pet Plan Limited (Registered in England No. 1282939) and Allianz Insurance plc (Registered in England No. 84638), Registered office: 57 Ladymead, Guildford, Surrey GU1 1DB. Pet Plan Limited is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority. Financial Services Register No. 311969. Allianz Insurance plc is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority. Financial Services Register No. 121849. Pet Plan Limited is a subsidiary of Allianz Insurance plc. Fitz All Media Limited is an Appointed Representative of Pet Plan Limited. Live Chat Get a quote ×Close Home Dog Cat Rabbit Multipet Other Existing Customers Pet Advice About Petplan Help 

AboutJoin UsCoursesLocationsHostingBlogContactFind CoursesMy AccountDog First Aid Training CoursesProviding trusted Dog First Aid Training across the UKOur CoursesOur ServicesWe are a network of veterinary professionals and trainers with a shared vision - to give everyone with a dog in their life the skills and confidence to act in an emergency.There are 9 million dogs in the UK and the majority will require First Aid at least once in their life. As owners and carers we never know when an accident may happen and they will need our help.Since 2013 we have trained thousands of people to provide the emergency care their dogs need before getting to a vet. We are so proud that in many cases this has saved the dog's life.Find a courseWant to know what to do if your dog is choking? How about how to give lifesaving CPR? Our training is available across the whole of the UK and we even offer tutor led online training now too!Find a courseHost a CourseAre you a doggy business or rescue operation? We make it easy for you to host a course. You provide a venue and the attendees, we provide the training and certification. Earn money and increase awareness for your business or charity whilst giving your customers added value.Host a CourseJoin UsFancy running your own business? Do you love helping dogs and people? We support people just like you to run their own successful Franchise. With a tried and tested business model and the support of Head Office and the wider network, you will be in business for yourself, but not by yourself.Join UsAbout UsOur courses are CPD accredited, giving you an assurance of quality and are delivered throughout the UK. About UsOur PartnersDog First Aid are proud members of the following AssociationsSubscribe to our NewsletterLet us keep you up to date with our latest news by signing up to receive our email newsletter.Firstname*Lastname*Email*Client ReviewsDog First Aid has a great reputation with it's customers and an excellent Trustist Review score. Find out what they have to say by visiting our reviews page.T BrownLearned so much useful information in a relaxed & friendly atmosphere, I now feel confident that I could deal with a wide range of first aid situations & at least be helpful in some way if not by saving a dog's life!!S SmithI've walked away feeling so much more confident in dealing with a first aid situation and hopefully I will never need to use a lot of it, but if the worst happens I now know how to possibly save the life of someones precious canine friend. I highly recommend anyone who owns a dog to take this course.Contact UsWe would love to hear from you!You can call us on 0800 999 6632 or email us on info@dog-first-aid.com or you can complete the form below and we will be in touch!* Required fieldsFirst Name*Last Name*PhoneEmail*Postal Code*Message*How did you find us?SupportFinderAboutJoin UsCoursesLocationsHostingJoin UsBlogContactFinderAccountMenu0800 999 6632info@dog-first-aid.comSupport©Dog First Aid Training Ltd 2013-2023. Built by Franscape.Privacy PolicyCookie PolicyTerms & Conditions 

AboutJoin UsCoursesLocationsHostingBlogContactFind CoursesMy AccountCoursesTrust the experts in dog first aidCoursesOur workshops teach you how to administer dog first aid for a range of common injuries and first aid scenariosEmergency Canine CareOur 'Dog First Aid' course is ideal for anyone living or working with dogs. It will teach the essentials of caring for a dog in a range of circumstances.View CourseFlat Faced Breeds - Health AwarenessBrachycephalic dog breeds have unique medical needs. This course will help you understand and respond to your dog's needs.View CourseWhether you work with dogs or share your life with them, having the confidence to act in an emergency is so rewarding. Be there for your dog when he needs you most.SupportFinderAboutJoin UsCoursesLocationsHostingJoin UsBlogContactHomeFinderAccountMenu0800 999 6632info@dog-first-aid.comSupport©Dog First Aid Training Ltd 2013-2023. Built by Franscape.Privacy PolicyCookie PolicyTerms & Conditions 

AboutJoin UsCoursesLocationsHostingBlogContactFind CoursesMy AccountSupportFinderAboutJoin UsCoursesLocationsHostingJoin UsBlogContactHomeFinderAccountMenu 

Donate Sponsor Adopt a cat Find a cat Choosing a cat Preparing for a cat Buying a kitten Adopt a cat FAQs What is our adoption fee? About Cats Protection Our vision Our history Annual Review Meet the trustees Structure, governance and management Corporate partners CATS report 2022 Cats Protection blog What we do Campaigning Neutering Financial assistance Education Grief and loss Paws Protect - cat fostering service Cat Guardians Thinking about giving up your cat? Help and advice Getting a cat Neutering, vaccinations and microchipping Pregnancy and kitten care Cat behaviour Behaviour Guide Lost, found and feral cats Cats and your family Diet Home and environment Health Seasonal advice For vets and nurses Online learning Support us Donate Sponsor a cat Lottery and raffle Volunteering Volunteer opportunities Gifts in wills Pledge form Giving in memory Become a member Events Challenge events National Cat Awards Corporate partners Philanthropy The Cat magazine Fundraise for Cats Protection Work for us Shop Online gift shop Shop with our partners Sponsor a cat Hide & Sleep® Find us Contact us Find a shop Find the National Cat Centre Give us your feedback - we're all ears! Donate Sponsor Adopt a cat Find a cat Choosing a cat Preparing for a cat Buying a kitten Adopt a cat FAQs What is our adoption fee? About Cats Protection Our vision Our history Annual Review Meet the trustees Structure, governance and management Corporate partners CATS report 2022 Cats Protection blog What we do Campaigning Neutering Education Grief and loss Paws Protect - cat fostering service Cat Guardians Thinking about giving up your cat? Help and advice Getting a cat Neutering, vaccinations and microchipping Pregnancy and kitten care Cat behaviour Lost, found and feral cats Cats and your family Diet Home and environment Health Seasonal advice For vets and nurses Online learning Support us Donate Sponsor a cat Lottery and raffle Volunteering Gifts in wills Giving in memory Become a member Events Corporate partners Philanthropy The Cat magazine Fundraise for Cats Protection Work for us Shop Online gift shop Shop with our partners Sponsor a cat Hide & Sleep® Find us Contact us Find a shop Find the National Cat Centre Give us your feedback - we're all ears! Cat first aid > Help and advice> Health> Cat first aid Worried your cat may be sick or injured? Take a look at our guide on cat first aid. Accidents and emergencies It can be a worrying time if your cat is injured or becomes suddenly unwell. From burns and scalds to suspected poisoning and even road traffic accidents, the best response to any scenario is to call your vet for advice. However, if you’d like to be prepared, take a look at our tips on some common emergencies below. It is worth mentioning that you should never give your cat medicines intended for human consumption, as this could harm them. Contents What to do first in an emergency? Common injuries and emergencies When to call the vet Should I have a first kit aid for my cat? Home remedies for cats What to do first in an emergency? First of all, make sure your cat is somewhere safe. Some cats, when frightened, may attempt to run back outside or hide, so try to confine them to a single room where you can prepare for the next steps. Cats when injured or unwell are vulnerable and may be in pain and may lash out or behave differently than normal. It is very important to avoid further stress as much as possible. Approach them carefully and calmly, speaking gently. Have a thick towel to hand, as gently wrapping them may allow safe transfer to their carrier Call your vet as soon as possible, if your cat needs an emergency appointment they can prepare for your arrival. They can also provide direct advice over the phone if needed. Remember that many clinics will have an alternative site for their out-of-hours care (emergency provision outside of normal opening times), so ensure that you know where you are going and the contact details Know where your cat carrier is, and it can be lined and padded with a blanket ready for use. Prior familiarity with the carrier can greatly help reduce the stress of travel. More information on using a cat carrier There are several common cat injuries or illnesses that may benefit from basic first aid. However, if a cat is unwell or hurt, they may resent handling or restraint and avoiding further stress is vital. Prioritise getting them safely and quickly to the vets. Common injuries and emergencies Bleeding If your cat has a wound that is actively bleeding, a tight bandage or applying firm pressure with a pad can be used to stem the blood flow. If you have dressing material, apply a non-adhesive dressing first, then use bandaging to firmly hold this in place. A small amount of dressing tape such as micropore tape can be used to secure the bandage material. If blood is coming through the dressing, another layer of bandage can be applied tightly over the top. Pressure bandages should not be kept in place for long, but it can help control bleeding during travel to the vet. If there is evidence of blood but no active bleeding, then move your cat very gently to avoid stimulating blood flow. Choking This can be caused when something is stuck in the windpipe, resulting in difficulty breathing. Cats can also appear to choke with respiratory diseases such as asthma. If you can see an object in their mouth you can try to pull it out. If there is a string attached to something in the throat (such as on a toy) grasp this and gently pull. If an object is not visible do not put your fingers down their throat to try and find it, this may push it further down and make matters worse. Seek veterinary attention immediately for all breathing concerns. Limb and tail injuries If your cat is lame and you fear they may have broken a bone, move your cat very carefully into a lined carrier. Do not attempt to bandage the affected limb. Limp tails, even if they appear non-painful, need a veterinary assessment. Tail pull injuries (where the tail gets pulled or trapped and damage occurs to the nerves at the base of the tail) are common in cats and can be associated with an inability to pass urine or faeces/poo. If a cat is vocalising or distressed, and unable to move one or more legs, this may indicate a blood clot, which is a painful emergency condition and requires immediate veterinary care. Burns and scalds If the injury is fresh and your cat allows it, run cold water over the burn for at least five minutes before seeing your vet. Do not apply any creams or treatments and ensure you keep your cat warm and calm. Poisoning If you can, take the plant or item that you suspect has poisoned your cat with you to the vet. More information on signs of poisoning in cats. Fits Do not try and hold your cat - instead, darken the room and reduce noise and stimulation. Remove any items that may cause accidents, place cushions or pillows to pad around furniture and contact your vet. Collapse Move your cat very carefully, wrap them in a blanket and place them in a carrier before taking them to the vet. Heatstroke Although heatstroke is rare, it might occur if a cat has been trapped in a hot space for a considerable amount of time. In this case, wet their coat with tepid water and put your cat somewhere cool before phoning your vet. Bee stings If the sting is visible and your cat allows it, use a credit card or a similar blunt object to scrape the stinger out, without squeezing the area. Otherwise, book your vet to do this. Monitor closely for any signs of an allergic reaction and contact your vet for further advice. Unable to urinate Cats, usually male cats, can develop a blockage which means they are unable to urinate. Their bladder will continue to fill, and in time this will cause damage to the kidneys and secondary changes which are life threatening. Cats will often go in and out of their tray frequently, cry out in pain, and you may notice them cleaning themselves excessively. If your cat is attempting to urinate and not passing a steady stream, contact your vet as soon as possible. Road traffic accidents or falls All cats who have been involved in a road traffic accident, or fallen from a height, should be checked by a vet. Cats may appear uninjured but have significant internal injuries. When to call the vet Although sometimes it can be tricky to decide whether the situation is an emergency, your vet is there to help you decide so if in doubt, call them to see if they recommend an appointment. If your cat displays any of the following behaviour, it is recommended that you call the vet immediately: your cat is weak or dull your cat has difficulty breathing your cat appears to be in pain or discomfort your cat has difficulty with balance your cat has difficulty urinating or defecating/pooing Remember to keep calm, approaching your cat carefully and slowly. A sick cat has the potential to lash out if they feel threatened. For more advice on common cat illnesses, take a look at our guide. Should I have a first aid kit for my cat? Whether your cat is an eager outdoor explorer or only stays indoors, it would be useful to have a cat first aid kit for any unexpected injuries or illnesses when you don’t have immediate access to the vet. However, we still recommend contacting your vet as soon as possible when the incident happens. Your first aid kit could include: a thermal blanket wrap to keep them warm a roll of bandages to cover an injury non-adhesive, absorbent dressings to cover open wounds sterile saline solution to wash away dirt and debris gauze swabs to clean up fluid scissors latex gloves Home remedies for cats When it comes to helping your pet if they become unwell, it might be tempting to look up home remedies online or ask friends or family for advice and try to treat them at home. However, it’s very important to speak to a qualified vet before any treatment for your cat is carried out. Each case of illness is unique and appropriate treatment can vary; some might require further examination by your vet. Human medications including painkillers such as paracetamol and ibuprofen should never be given to cats as they can be extremely toxic to them. Many essential oils and other natural products are also not suitable for pets. If you’re concerned about the cost of veterinary treatment, let the vet know and they should be able to provide you with a range of treatment options that can be tailored to you. We recommend taking out pet insurance which can reduce the stress of worry about how to pay for vets bills. Download: Caring for your cat guide Related topics Common cat illnesses - Topic Finding a vet - Topic Contact National Cat Centre, Lewes Road, Chelwood Gate, Haywards Heath, RH17 7TT 03000 12 12 12 Adopt a cat What we do Campaigning Our vision Help and advice Support us Volunteer opportunities Sponsor a cat Donate Cats Protection blog Media Centre Find us Find a shop Enter your postcode to find the nearest Cats Protection shop to your location. Find a shop Cats Protection is a registered Charity No. 203644 (England and Wales) and SCO37711 (Scotland). A company limited by guarantee registered in England and Wales (06772997). Registered office National Cat Centre, Chelwood Gate, Haywards Heath, Sussex, RH17 7TT How we use cookies Contact us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Safeguarding Policy Links Accessibility Sitemap Work for us Cats Protection Blog CP Portal website by mcm.click Save Cancel Find a Cat Donate About us 

Skip to main content Please enable JavaScript in your web browser to get the best experience. Donate Open search Close search Open menu Close menu Support us Support us Back Support us Donate Donate Back Donate Leave a gift in your Will Sponsor a pet Major gifts Other ways to give Get involved Get involved Back Get involved Fundraising events Volunteer Our campaigns Work at Blue Cross Shop Shop Back Shop Shop online Find a charity shop eBay shop Give as an organisation Give as an organisation Back Give as an organisation Corporate partnerships Payroll giving Charitable trusts and foundations Get pet advice Get pet advice Back Get pet advice Dog advice Dog advice Back Dog advice Cat advice Cat advice Back Cat advice Horse advice Horse advice Back Horse advice Rabbit advice Rabbit advice Back Rabbit advice Chinchilla advice Chinchilla advice Back Chinchilla advice Degu advice Degu advice Back Degu advice Ferret advice Ferret advice Back Ferret advice Gerbil advice Gerbil advice Back Gerbil advice Guinea pig advice Guinea pig advice Back Guinea pig advice Hamster advice Hamster advice Back Hamster advice Mouse advice Mouse advice Back Mouse advice Rat advice Rat advice Back Rat advice Find a pet Find a pet Back Find a pet Find a dog Find a dog Back Find a dog Find a cat Find a cat Back Find a cat Find a horse Find a horse Back Find a horse Find a small pet Find a small pet Back Find a small pet Finding the right pet Finding the right pet Back Finding the right pet Our adoption process Our adoption process Back Our adoption process Get help and support Get help and support Back Get help and support Affordable vet care Affordable vet care Back Affordable vet care Support with pet loss Support with pet loss Back Support with pet loss Giving up a pet or horse Giving up a pet or horse Back Giving up a pet or horse Pet Peace of Mind Pet Peace of Mind Back Pet Peace of Mind Pet food banks Pet food banks Back Pet food banks Find us Open menu Close menu Support us Support us Back Support us Donate Donate Back Donate Leave a gift in your Will Sponsor a pet Major gifts Other ways to give Get involved Get involved Back Get involved Fundraising events Volunteer Our campaigns Work at Blue Cross Shop Shop Back Shop Shop online Find a charity shop eBay shop Give as an organisation Give as an organisation Back Give as an organisation Corporate partnerships Payroll giving Charitable trusts and foundations Get pet advice Get pet advice Back Get pet advice Dog advice Dog advice Back Dog advice Cat advice Cat advice Back Cat advice Horse advice Horse advice Back Horse advice Rabbit advice Rabbit advice Back Rabbit advice Chinchilla advice Chinchilla advice Back Chinchilla advice Degu advice Degu advice Back Degu advice Ferret advice Ferret advice Back Ferret advice Gerbil advice Gerbil advice Back Gerbil advice Guinea pig advice Guinea pig advice Back Guinea pig advice Hamster advice Hamster advice Back Hamster advice Mouse advice Mouse advice Back Mouse advice Rat advice Rat advice Back Rat advice Find a pet Find a pet Back Find a pet Find a dog Find a dog Back Find a dog Find a cat Find a cat Back Find a cat Find a horse Find a horse Back Find a horse Find a small pet Find a small pet Back Find a small pet Finding the right pet Finding the right pet Back Finding the right pet Our adoption process Our adoption process Back Our adoption process Get help and support Get help and support Back Get help and support Affordable vet care Affordable vet care Back Affordable vet care Support with pet loss Support with pet loss Back Support with pet loss Giving up a pet or horse Giving up a pet or horse Back Giving up a pet or horse Pet Peace of Mind Pet Peace of Mind Back Pet Peace of Mind Pet food banks Pet food banks Back Pet food banks Find us Open search Close search Donate Search... Basic first aid for cats Share this page Print page Make sure you’re always prepared for an emergency. The best action for all emergency situations is to contact the vet, so find out the name of your local practice and keep your vet's phone number to hand. First aid for cats top tips Never give human medicines to a cat, and do not offer food or drink in case your pet has to have an urgent anaesthetic Any cat with breathing difficulties should be handled carefully and gently, particularly if they are breathing with an open mouth. Many of these patients are dangerously ill and can collapse suddenly if upset If you have to put an Elizabethan collar on your cat, do not let the cat outside afterwards, as it may prevent your cat seeing traffic Drive carefully when going to the surgery and always have the cat in a closed box or carrier for transport. Always phone first, whatever the situation, as there may not be a vet constantly at the clinic. However, staff may be able to suggest immediate action to take. Have a pen handy in case another number is given. Treatment can usually be provided more quickly if the cat is taken to the surgery, rather than calling the vet to your home. First ensure the safety of yourself and others. Keep calm and assess the situation before acting. Injured animals are frightened and in pain, and may try to bite anyone who touches them. Approach your cat quietly and slowly, avoiding sudden movements. The best way of lifting an injured cat is to put one hand under the chin on the front of the chest, and the other behind the hindlegs. If the cat seems frightened and potentially aggressive, it is better to lift the cat in a thick towel, but be careful as cats can bite through towels. If you are dealing with an unknown cat, you may be able to encourage the animal into a shed or garage before seeking help. Sometimes cats can be persuaded to run into the safety and security of a cat box, if there is no other obvious escape route. If you are bitten, see your doctor. Is it an emergency? Sometimes outside normal hours it is difficult to decide whether urgent attention is needed. You can always call to ask for advice. You should phone the vet if: your pet seems weak, is reluctant to get up, or is dull or depressed there is difficulty breathing, the breath is noisy or rapid, or there is continual coughing that is causing distress there is repeated vomiting, particularly if the animal is young or elderly. Diarrhoea, however, is less serious (except in kittens) unless it is severe, bloody or the animal seems weak or unwell. Feed small amounts of a bland diet (boiled chicken or white fish) and see a vet if it persists more than a day. your cat appears to be in severe pain or discomfort your pet suddenly has difficulty with balance your pet is trying to urinate or defecate but is unable to pass anything. Blockage of the bladder sometimes occurs, especially in males, and can kill if not treated urgently. Why not take a look at our advice about caring for your sick cat. Road accidents Prevention is better than cure so keep your cat in at night, as this is when most road accidents occur. If you find a cat involved in a road accident, take them to the vet, even if the cat appears to be unhurt. There may be internal injuries that are not immediately obvious. Pick up the cat carefully as described above, keeping them warm, and place them in a box for transportation to the surgery. Falls Falls can cause severe injuries. If you live in a flat, open windows should be covered with screens. Do not let your cat out onto an unprotected balcony. If your cat falls from a height, take the animal to the vet for a check-up. Bleeding Keep the cat quiet and calm. Put on a tight bandage. Improvise with strips of towel or clothing if necessary. If blood is seeping through, apply another tight layer. Only use a tourniquet as a last resort. If you cannot put on a bandage, press a pad firmly onto the wound and hold it in place. Go to the vet straight away. If you have bandaging materials, layer these as follows. Firstly, place a non-stick dressing on the wound and cover with swabs or a cotton bandage. Then place a layer of cotton wool over this and cover again with cotton bandage. Secure this top layer of bandage to the hair with surgical tape, and cover all of it with adhesive bandage or tape. Do not stick Elastoplast to the hair and never leave a bandage on for more than 24 hours. Tail injuries See your vet if your cat’s tail is limp, has been trapped in a door, or pulled hard. Such injuries can cause serious bladder problems. Broken bones Deal with any serious bleeding but do not apply a splint – it is painful, and can cause the bone to break through the skin. Confine the patient to a well padded carrier for transportation to the vet. Burns and scalds Run cold water over these for at least five minutes then contact your vet. Do not apply ointments or creams, although you can cover the wound with a saline-soaked gauze pad while awaiting treatment. Remember to keep the patient warm. Poisoning Try to find packaging from the substance swallowed and have it with you when you phone the vet. If chewing of plants is suspected, try to find out the name of the plant, and cut a sample. Call the vet immediately and do not make your cat vomit unless the vet says to do so. Take any packaging or plant cuttings with you to the vet. Coat contamination If a substance such as paint or tar has got onto your cat’s coat or paws, prevent your cat licking it, as the substance may be toxic. Use an Elizabethan collar (obtainable from vets) if you have one. You may be able to clip off the small areas of affected hair, but never use turpentine or paint remover on your cat. Contact the vet, as bathing may be necessary. Sedatives may be required to do this thoroughly. Fits If your cat is having a fit, do not try to hold or comfort the animal, as this provides stimulation, which may prolong the fit. Darken the room and reduce noise. Remove items which may cause injury, especially anything electrical. Pad your furniture with cushions and call the vet. Fights If your cat is wounded after a fight, but seems otherwise well, make a routine appointment with the vet as antibiotics are usually needed. Fight-wounds are often not detected immediately. The first indication may be an oozing smelly wound from a burst abscess. In this case contact your vet. Eye injuries Do not allow rubbing of a sore eye with the paws – use an Elizabethan collar. Contact the vet immediately if there has been trauma, if your cat has a closed or discharging eye, or for any sudden eye problem. If chemicals have entered the cat’s eye, flush out with water repeatedly (preferably from an eye bottle) and call the vet. Drowning Never put yourself at risk attempting to rescue a drowning cat. Wipe away material from the mouth and nose and hold the cat upside down by the hindlegs until any water has drained out. Give resuscitation if breathing has stopped. Even if your pet seems to recover, always see the vet, as complications afterwards are common. Electric shock If a high voltage, non-domestic (for example, power lines) supply is involved, do not approach. Call the police. In the home, turn off power first. If this is impossible, you may be able to use a dry non-metallic item, like a broom handle, to push a cat away from the power source. If breathing has stopped, give resuscitation. Call the vet immediately. Heatstroke Heatstroke is rare but can happen if a cat has been trapped somewhere such as a greenhouse on a hot day. Affected animals are weak, panting, dribbling and distressed. Put the cat somewhere cool, preferably in a draught. Wet their coat with tepid water (not cold water as this contracts the blood vessels in the skin and slows heat loss) and phone the vet. You may offer the cat a small amount of water. Stings Pull out the sting by pressing below the poison sac, then bathe the area in water or either a solution of bicarbonate of soda for a bee sting or diluted vinegar for that of a wasp. Soothe with ice. If the sting is in the mouth or throat, contact the vet as it may swell and interfere with breathing. Basic resuscitation Put the animal on their side and check that breathing has definitely stopped (hold a wisp of fur to the nostrils). Open the mouth, pull the tongue forwards and check for obstructions, such as blood. Be careful not to get bitten when removing any material. If breathing does not start, extend the head (pointing the nose forwards). Hold the mouth closed, and blow into the nose about ten times per minute. If you cannot feel a heartbeat, push on the chest just behind the forelegs every one or two seconds. Give two breaths into the nose for every 15 pushes on the chest. If this is unsuccessful after three minutes, recovery is unlikely. Items for your cat’s first aid kit: Bandages – a roll of self-adhesive or crepe bandage (five centimetres width) Conforming or open-weave bandages (two and a half centimetres width) Surgical sticky tape Box of cotton wool Box of sterile absorbent gauze or a packet of swabs Some non-adhesive absorbent dressings (five centimetres square) to cover open wounds Blunt-ended scissors, preferably curved Thick towel Elizabethan collar Bottle of sterile saline solution Downloads Basic first aid for cats More from Blue Cross Microchipping your dog or cat Cat flu Stop your cat spraying and soiling in the house What is your cat’s tail telling you? — Page last updated 30/05/2023 Sign up to our newsletter The best way to stay up to date with what's going on at Blue Cross is to join our mailing list. Sign up now Follow us Our Facebook Our Instagram Our Twitter Our YouTube Our LinkedIn About Blue Cross About Blue Cross About Blue Cross Education Work at Blue Cross Our impact framework Modern slavery statement Contact us Contact us Contact us General enquiries Find an animal hospital Find a rehoming centre Find a charity shop Media centre Media centre Media centre News Press Publications Stories Policies Policies Policies Cookie policy Privacy policy Supporter charter Terms and conditions Blue Cross is a registered charity in England and Wales (224392) and in Scotland (SC040154). A company limited by guarantee. Registered company in England and Wales under company number 00363197. Registered address Shilton Road, Burford, Oxfordshire, OX18 4PF. 

Close Search About Us Everyday Care Main Menu CareClub Know Your Pet Breed Information Press Center Main Menu Press Center Events Careers Shop Explore Shop Main Menu Explore Shop All Products All Products Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Dogs For Dogs Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Cats For Cats Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets Find Care Welcome to Existing Account Already have a myVCA account? Log in 24/7 to access your pet’s health care information. Log In Now Activate Your Account Looking for a convenient way to access your pet’s health records, refill prescriptions, view upcoming appointments and more? Set up your myVCA account today. Activate Account Find Care myVCA Search Shopping Cart × Search Home Know Your Pet First Aid For Cats First Aid for Cats - Shock, Rescue Breathing, and CPR By Malcolm Weir, DVM, MSc, MPH; Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Ernest Ward, DVM Print Article Medical emergencies occur suddenly and without warning. It is important for all cat owners to have a basic understanding of common veterinary medical emergencies and basic first aid for their pets. While no one can be prepared for all emergencies, there are some simple guidelines you should follow and things to look for if your cat seems ill or is involved in an accident. For a general overview of what constitutes an emergency and how to handle common crisis situations, see the handout “Emergencies in Cats”. What is first aid?First aid is the initial treatment given in a medical emergency. Its purpose is to: preserve life reduce pain and discomfort minimize any risk of permanent disability or disfigurement In an emergency, what should I do first? Keep calm and assess the scene for any additional threats to you or your pet. This is important for everyone's safety. Keep your cat warm (except in heat stroke), as quiet as possible, and keep movement to a minimum, especially if there is possible trauma, broken limbs, or any neurological symptoms. Contact your veterinary hospital to inform them of the situation and get specific first aid advice. To safely move or transport an injured cat, use a suitable container such as a strong cardboard box or a cat carrier (remove the top for easy and safe access to the carrier; DO NOT push an injured cat through the small door or opening). Place a blanket or thick towel over the patient. Get to the veterinary hospital as soon as possible. Are there any restraint tips that might be useful?Most animals you will encounter will be panicked, disoriented, or injured. The stress of an emergency can cause an otherwise friendly animal to act aggressively. Although most panicky animals respond to a calm, soothing voice, use caution when approaching or touching any injured animal. Muzzles can be difficult to put on a cat due to the shape of most cats' faces. There are specific muzzles designed for use in cats but they are rarely handy when an emergency strikes. You can drape a towel over the cat's head to provide some measure of protection. You can also wrap the body of a frightened or unmanageable cat in a blanket or towel. Do not constrict the trachea or airway. If possible, leave the head exposed, unless your cat is very aggressive. Use caution if you are suspicious of a fractured bone or spinal injury. If you are suspicious of a spinal injury, lay your cat in a large box. What is shock?Shock has many definitions. It is a complex systemic (whole-body) reaction to several situations, including severe trauma, hemorrhage or sudden blood loss, heart failure, and other causes of decreased circulation (e.g., severe and sudden allergic reaction and heat stroke). A life-threatening fall in blood pressure is a dangerous part of shock. If not treated quickly and effectively, systemic shock may cause irreversible injury to body cells, and it can be fatal. What are the signs of shock?Signs of shock include rapid breathing (which may be noisy), rapid heart rate with a weak pulse, pale mucous membranes (gums, lips, under eyelids), severe depression (listlessness), and cool extremities (limbs and ears). Your cat may vomit. What should I do if my cat is showing signs of shock?Keep your cat as quiet as possible and try to conserve heat by covering it with blankets, towels, or even newspapers. Follow the A, B, and Cs of first aid: A Airway B Breathing C Cardiac function Airway. Anything that obstructs the airway prevents oxygen from entering the lungs. Do your best to clear the mouth and throat of any obstruction, such as vomit, saliva, or other foreign material. Be careful - your cat may bite you in panic. Breathing. If your cat is unconscious and does not appear to be breathing, try gently pumping the chest with the palm of your hand, at the same time feeling just behind the elbow to detect a heartbeat or pulse. If this is unsuccessful, give your cat rescue breathing (see below). Be careful - injured pets may bite you out of fear. If you are unsure about the health or vaccination status of the injured pet, avoid contact with bodily fluids and blood. Cardiac function. If you are unable to detect a heartbeat or pulse, or if it feels weak and slow, try pressing on the chest with your palm and elevating the lower half of the body to promote blood flow to the brain. Follow the CPR steps below. How do I perform rescue breathing for my cat?If your cat is unresponsive, ensure that there is an open airway and then: Carefully pull the tongue out of the mouth. Extend the head and neck so that they are in a straight line. DO NOT overextend the neck in animals that have obvious head and neck trauma. Carefully clear the mouth of any debris that may be obstructing breathing. Place your hand over your cat's muzzle while holding the mouth shut and extend the neck. For cats, you can sometimes improvise with a Styrofoam cup or other similarly shaped object by poking a large hole in the bottom for you to breathe through and putting the opening over your cat's face. Ensure a relatively tight seal around the muzzle. Blowing into the nostrils, give two to three breaths and watch for a rise in the chest. For rescue breathing, provide 10 breaths per minute. If you do not see a rise in the chest, reposition the neck or search for airway obstruction. If your cat fails to breathe on its own, you may attempt an acupressure maneuver. Press firmly with your fingernail or another hard dull object in the space between the nostrils and the upper lip (nasal philtrum). Do this for 10-30 seconds. What if my cat requires CPR?If there are still no obvious signs of life after you have established an airway and begun rescue breathing, you should attempt chest compressions: Make sure there is no major bleeding. If there is bleeding, have an assistant manage the bleeding while you perform CPR. If possible, lay your cat on its right side. Feel for a heartbeat or femoral pulse. The femoral pulse is located inside the leg in the groin region. Cats do not have a readily palpable carotid (neck) pulse. Bend the left forearm and note the location where the elbow touches the chest. This is close to the middle of the rib cage. Use one hand to compress the chest from both sides by putting your fingers on one side and your thumb on the other side of the chest. Compress the chest 100-120 times per minute. The rate should be about 30 compressions for every two breaths. Try to compress the chest wall at least 30-50%. This is about 1" (2 cm) in the average cat. Is there anything else I should know?After being involved in an emergency or accident, it is important that you take your cat for a veterinary examination as soon as possible, even if she appears to have recovered fully. More handouts in the First Aid series provide advice specific to other types of injuries and medical emergencies. Keywords Emergencies Pet Services Find a Hospital Locate a hospital near you Learn more Related Articles VCA ANIMAL HOSPITALS About Us Contact Us Find a Hospital Location Directory Press Center Social Responsibility Career Opportunities Grow Your Hospital Sitemap Affiliate of Mars Inc. 2023 | © Copyright VCA Animal Hospitals all rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Web Accessibility | AdChoices | Cookie Notice | Cookie Settings | Your Privacy Choices 

Banfield Pet Hospital Petcare on the go! Get on the App Store GET GET Search Optimum Wellness Plans Dental care Microchipping Spay and neuter Vaccinations Diet and nutrition Shop Locations/appointments MyBanfield EN English Spanish Our services Pet wellness plans Pet health resources About us Blog Careers Veterinary care Ways to get care Visit information Pet wellness plans Virtual petcare Pet Chat™ Locations Optimum Wellness Plans® Puppy wellness plans Kitten wellness plans Dog wellness plans Cat wellness plans Enroll now Inquire Wellness plan FAQs Puppy care Kitten care Dental care Diet and nutrition Ear care Fleas Ticks Worms Skin and coat care Safety and first aid Vaccinations What is pet wellness? About us Community involvement Contact us Newsroom Our leadership MyBanfield EN English Spanish Optimum Wellness Plans Dental care Microchipping Spay and neuter Vaccinations Diet and nutrition Shop Locations/appointments Our services Veterinary care Ways to get care Visit information Pet wellness plans Virtual petcare Pet Chat™ Locations Pet wellness plans Optimum Wellness Plans® Puppy wellness plans Kitten wellness plans Dog wellness plans Cat wellness plans Enroll now Inquire Wellness plan FAQs Pet health resources Puppy care Kitten care Dental care Diet and nutrition Ear care Fleas Ticks Worms Skin and coat care Safety and first aid Vaccinations What is pet wellness? About us About us Community involvement Contact us Newsroom Our leadership Blog Careers Wellness at Banfield® Kitten hub Cat first aid Explore more Kitten Hub Kitten health and petcare Picking a vet Vaccinations for cats Parasite control for cats Spaying and neutering Dental care for cats Signs of illness Cat first aid Indoor vs outdoor cats Feeding your kitten Choosing cat food All about kitty treats Kitten behavior Understanding cats Bonding with cats Cat-proofing your home Signs of stress Supplies for kittens Welcoming your kitty Cat supplies Litter box stuff Grooming your cats In this section Kitten Hub Kitten health and petcare Picking a vet Vaccinations for cats Parasite control for cats Spaying and neutering Dental care for cats Signs of illness Cat first aid Indoor vs outdoor cats Feeding your kitten Choosing cat food All about kitty treats Kitten behavior Understanding cats Bonding with cats Cat-proofing your home Signs of stress Supplies for kittens Welcoming your kitty Cat supplies Litter box stuff Grooming your cats basic kitten and cat first aid What to put on a cat’s wound if they’re hurt or bleeding A sick or injured cat needs immediate emergency veterinary care. Be prepared with a simple pet first aid kit and emergency vet numbers on hand — basic first aid can help make dangerous situations potentially less life-threatening and buy you valuable time as you rush to emergency care. Here’s what to know, do, and expect. What should I have for first aid for cats? Keep the number of your local emergency veterinary hospital on hand so you can call for immediate advice. Clean, nonstick bandages and towels can be used to wrap wounds or swaddle your cat. If you have a hard-sided carrier, remove the top so you can easily place your cat inside. See more about making a pet first aid kit Warning! Human painkillers can hurt or even kill your cat. Never use human pills, ointments, disinfectants, or adhesive Band-Aids unless explicitly directed by your veterinary team. What should I do if my cat is hurt? Contact your emergency vet immediately. They can give you specific firsthand advice, and even prep their gear if they know you’re coming. Gently swaddle your cat in a blanket or towel to help keep them warm and contained — you don’t want your hurt and frightened pet doing more damage by struggling or trying to get loose. Make sure they feel fully supported at all times. Try to keep one hand near their chest and the other supporting their hind end. Bites, cuts, burns, and wounds: Don’t try to probe the wound or do a deep clean. Remove any sticks, leaves, or chunky dirt around the wound and rinse with clean water. If the wound is bleeding, apply pressure with a clean towel or cloth. Get to the vet as soon as possible — most wounds need surgical care and stitches, and infection is a real and immediate real risk. Broken bones: Keep your cat warm and contained. Don’t try to splint the break yourself — leave that to the vet. Choking: Never try to get anything out of your cat’s throat on your own. If you suspect choking, call your vet or get to emergency care. Eye injuries: You can try a saline rinse to remove any loose debris, but your best bet is immediate veterinary care. Heatstroke: Cats that have been left in hot cars or rooms can overheat (don’t do it!). Look for panting, drooling, and collapse. Don’t try to treat it — get to your vet. Poisoning: Don’t wait. If you suspect poison, call the Pet Poison Helpline at 1-800-213-6680. See more about pet poisoning Seizures: Don’t touch your cat or try to grab their tongue. Clear a safe area around them and contact your vet as soon as possible, even if they seem fine afterward. Shock and internal bleeding: Blunt trauma, like a bad fall or car accident, can cause incredibly dangerous internal bleeding or life-threatening shock. If you spot lethargy, panting, coughing up blood, a distended belly, or pale gums, rush to emergency care. Remember, safety first! Take care to minimize hurting yourself or others, and make sure that the situation is free of any danger to you and your pet. A hurt, scared cat may strike out even at people they love. If your cat is sick or unvaccinated, you want to be very, very careful to avoid touching contaminated body fluids or blood — and always mention these concerns to your emergency vet team. How Banfield can help In an emergency, please contact your local veterinary emergency hospital. Chat with a vet online: Every Optimum Wellness Plan® (OWP) comes with Vet Chat™, which gives you 24/7 access to live general veterinary advice via text. Chat now Urgent care advice: Call your veterinary team during hospital hours for urgent care advice. Find a Banfield location Optimum Wellness Plan® Affordable packages of smart, high-quality preventive petcare to help keep your pet happy and healthy. See OWP packages Welcome to the Banfield Shop An online store full of pet medications! Shop now Visit Banfield Find a location near me Make an appointment Ways to get care Important forms Banfield Pet Hospital About Banfield Community involvement Newsroom Inclusion and diversity COVID resource center Products and services Optimum Wellness Plans® Services Price estimator Pet Chat™ Shop Banfield Shop medications Shop for Optimum Wellness Plans® Shipping AutoShip Vetsource partnership About the Banfield Shop FAQs Health and wellness information Wellness at Banfield Puppy hub Kitten hub MyBanfield portal More from Banfield Banfield Foundation Banfield Exchange Banfield Associate resources Careers Stay in touch Download the Banfield app Privacy statement Your privacy choices Cookies notice Cookie settings AdChoices Legal terms of use Terms and conditions Accessibility Labor conditions applications MARS MARS Veterinary Health Contact us Site map Download mobile app Banfield Pet Hospital, an Affiliate of Mars, Incorporated © 2023 Mars or Affiliates Close Log in to MyBanfield Unable to log in. Check your info and try again? Duplicate user found. Please Contact cupport We have locked your account due to too many unsuccessful login attempts. Please try again in 30 minutes. We apologize for the inconvenience. Email or username Password Remember me Forgot password/email? New to MyBanfield? Create your account. Close Welcome to your paw-some new MyBanfield experience Get ready for a new and improved MyBanfield. To start, please quickly reset your password. Just use your MyBanfield email and we’ll send you a link. Unable to send email currently. Please try again later Whoops! That email isn’t in our system. Try a different email, contact support at the number below, or create your MyBanfield account now. Email Forgot your MyBanfield email? Having trouble remembering your MyBanfield email address? Quick tips: Try the email that gets all of your Banfield emails If you have a username, try using that instead If you still need help, please contact Banfield customer support. Support hotline: 877-656-7146 Close If you can’t locate your MyBanfield email, try the tips below. Quick tips: Try the email that gets all of your Banfield emails Try other emails that may be associated with your account If you still need help, please contact Banfield customer support. Support hotline: 877-656-7146 Close Need help with your password? No problem. Enter your email and we'll send a reset link for that account. Unable to send email currently. Please try again later Whoops! That email isn’t in our system. Try a different email, contact support at the number below, or create your MyBanfield account now. Email Forgot your MyBanfield email? Need help finding your MyBanfield email address? Quick tips: Try the email that gets all of your Banfield emails If you have a username, try using that instead If you still need help, please contact Banfield customer support. Support hotline: 877-656-7146 Close Need help with your Client ID? Have you been to Banfield before? Look for your Banfield Client ID at the top right-hand corner of any Banfield invoice, or call support at 877-656-7146. Are you new to Banfield? We’ll give you your Client ID at your first appointment so you can create your account. Hope to see you soon! Make an appointment Close OWP inquiry form Tell us a little bit about yourself and your BFF. First name Middle name Last name Pet name Phone number Email Do you already have a Banfield account? Yes No Zip code Does your pet wag, or purr? We love all animals, but can only offer OWPs for dogs, cats, puppies, and kittens. Select Dog Cat Is your pet over 6 months old? Select Under 6 Months Over 6 Months Message Yes, I would like to receive important pet health email reminders and offers By checking this box, I consent to Banfield to call me to discuss a wellness plan for my pet. I understand that I may be contacted at the number I’m providing in this form using automated technology and/or prerecorded messages and that the purchase of goods or service is not conditioned upon my consent to receive this call. I understand that submitting this form confirms my consent and that I must be of the age of majority to submit this form. Loading... Close Thank you for your inquiry Someone from our OWP team will get in touch with you shortly. Close Get your coupon for a complimentary office visit First name Middle name Last name Email Phone Zip code Message Yes, I would like to receive email offers and reminders. Dogs and cats only. New pets only. Restrictions apply. Close Close Sorry, something seems to have gone wrong. Please try again later. If the issue persists, give us a call at 877-656-7146. Close Need help? Call our support hotline at 877-656-7146 Close Something’s not quite right. Please make sure your password includes all of the items listed and is not one you have used before. Close Confirm Are you sure to cancel the appointment. Continue? Yes No Close Nothing on file Is this an error? Please contact us at 877-656-7146 or Chat live now 

Skip to main content Purina UK Your Pet, Our Passion. Header top Shop Purina Newsletters Contact us Main navigation Finding a pet dog QUIZ: What dog is right for me? Dog owner stories See all dog breeds Article by topics Getting a dog Dog names Dog types Breed guides Breed groups Top dog articles Benefits of having a dog Adopting a dog Disney dog names The best black dog names See all dog articles cat QUIZ: What cat is right for me? See all cat breeds Article by topics Getting a cat Cat names Cat types Breed guides Top cat articles Adopting a cat Most affectionate breeds Top 10 white cat names The best black cat names See all cat articles Find your dog Find your cat Dog products dog Dog food by type Dry food Wet food Grain-free Treats Supplements Dog food by breed size Small Large Dog food by lifestage Puppy Adult Senior See all dog food Where to Buy Join 'Your Purina' Free samples Dog brands Adventuros Bakers BETA Bonio Dentalife PRO PLAN PRO PLAN Veterinary Diets Winalot See all brands Top dog articles What to feed your dog Wet or dry dog food? Dog nutrition guide Harmful dog foods See all feeding advice Product Finder | Where to Buy Discover all online and physical stores around you that sell your favourite products across all Purina brands. Get started Cat products cat Cat food by type Wet food Dry food Grain-free Treats Supplements Cat food by lifestage Kitten Adult Senior 7+ See all cat food Where to Buy Join 'Your Purina' Free samples Cat brands Dentalife Felix Go-Cat Gourmet PRO PLAN PRO PLAN Veterinary Diets PURINA ONE See all brands Top cat articles How to feed a fussy cat What to feed your cat Feeding indoor cats Wet or dry food? See all feeding advice Product Finder | Where to Buy Discover all online and physical stores around you that sell your favourite products across all Purina brands. Get started Care & Advice dog Dog articles by topics Puppy Puppy advice 'Growing Pup' personalised newsletter Adult Behaviour & training Health Feeding & nutrition Senior (7+) Senior advice See all dog articles Extra support for dog owners cat Cat articles by topics Kitten Kitten advice 'Kitten Code' personalised newsletter Adult Behaviour & training Health Feeding & nutrition Senior (7+) Senior advice See all cat articles Extra support for cat owners Go to the PetCare hub Where to buy Meet Purina Who we are About us Our story, purpose & people Every bond is unique Contact us FAQs About our pet food Our nutritional philosophy Every ingredient has a purpose Our science Our latest innovation Your questions matter Your questions matter Our Impact PURINA CARES Purina Cares Our commitments FOR PETS & COMMUNITY Charity partners Pets at work Purina BetterwithPets Prize FOR THE PLANET How we contribute How to recycle our packaging News Home Pet Care Articles and Advice Expert Cat Care Kitten Guides & Advice Kitten Health Introduction How to tell if a cat is in pain Cat first aid How to handle an injured cat Helping a cat that’s bleeding Cat first aid for broken bones Dealing with burns and scalds What to do if your cat’s been poisoned Helping a fitting cat Insect bites or stings What to do if your cat is choking Next article Cat and Kitten Insurance Kitten Health Cat First Aid 4 min read Related topics Kitten Guides & AdviceExpert Cat CarePet Care Articles and Advice Our experts are here to help you Our experts are here to help Get in touch with us directly any time, any way. Message us Discover our range of cat food. Buy Now There’s nothing scarier than when our pets are unwell or hurt and we often naturally go into a panic as we don’t know what to do. At Purina, we’ve created this guide to cat first aid to help you keep your pet calm and comfortable until you can reach your veterinarian. Our cats are explorers at heart, whether it’s climbing the tree in the back garden or wandering off to investigate another cat ’s territory. Unfortunately, this love of adventure can sometimes land them in trouble and you may find yourself in need of some cat first aid skills. At Purina, we’ve put together this guide of essential cat first aid tips so you can provide help straight away, giving you valuable time until you can get them to your vet. How to tell if a cat is in pain Cats are very secretive creatures and because of this we don’t always know if they’re in pain, so it can be hard to know when they need cat first aid. While it will largely depend on the specific illness or injury your pet has, a few of the most common cat illness or sickness symptoms they’ll display are as follows: Hiding, such as in a dark place or in their cat igloo Rapid and shallow breathing Growling, hissing or crying Aggression both towards people and other pets in the home Sleeping more often Lack of appetite Obsessive licking of a particular area Lack of self-grooming Reluctance to move or engage in cat or kitten play Change in toileting Limping or difficulty getting around Cat first aid When your cat is in pain or suffering, knowing how to react can often make a huge difference. You’ll need to try and keep a level head and take deep breaths and remain calm, as your cat will likely be stressed and scared. The last thing you’ll want to do in an emergency situation is to make it worse by panicking, as cats are masters of sensing how we’re feeling. The first thing you should do is contact your vet. By phoning them they’ll be able to prepare for your arrival, and if it’s an emergency they may try and talk you through some basic cat first aid via the phone too. Never give your cat medicines intended for human use as these may be poisonous and cause an adverse reaction. How to handle an injured cat Previous Next 1 of 1 In the event you need to handle an injured cat to take them to the vets, you’ll need to know how to handle them safely. Unless advised otherwise by your vet depending on the circumstances here are our pointers: Approach them very slowly, then place one hand under their chin on the front of their chest, with the other between their back legs. If they seem particularly aggressive, you may want to use a thick towel to protect yourself and wear protective gloves as well. Once you’ve got them, place them into a well-padded carrier to ensure their journey is as comfortable as possible. You may want to cover the carrier with a towel to help them feel less frightened. Helping a cat that’s bleeding If your cat seems to be bleeding, it’s important to apply cat first aid quickly in order to prevent shock or collapse. If you find yourself in a situation where you need to slow bleeding before help can be sought, follow these steps: firstly, apply pressure for at least 10 minutes using a wad of gauze, tissue or a clean cloth – this may be difficult and you might need to get someone else to help you if your cat is resisting. Do not tie a ligature around the area. While you’re applying pressure, at no point should you lift the dressing to check if the bleeding has stopped as this could dislodge the clot. If the blood comes through the bandage, simply place a fresh one on top of the other one. Seek veterinary attention as soon as possible. Cat first aid for broken bones Take your cat to the vet as soon as possible. Support the affected area if you can with a towel underneath and gently lift them into a carrier. Never attempt to apply a splint yourself as this will do more harm than good and could cause the bone to break through the skin. Dealing with burns and scalds Soak a towel or flannel in cold water & apply directly to the affected area. Don’t apply any ointments or creams as this may create irritation, but you can use a saline-soaked gauze to protect the area. Once you’ve done this, take them to the vet straight away. What to do if your cat’s been poisoned If you know your cat’s been poisoned through eating something, it’s more important to get to a vet than spend time on cat first aid. You’ll need to locate the poison, phone the vet and get them there are soon as possible. It’s important that you bring the label or any information about what your cat has eaten, or if it’s a plant, get the name of it and take a sample or photo with you. Helping a fitting cat A common mistake that owners make when they see their cat having a fit is to try and hold them. Instead, you should darken the room, turn off anything that makes noise and make sure you remove anything that your cat could hurt themselves with. Once you’ve done this, phone your vet and they’ll recommend the next course of action. Insect bites or stings Previous Next 1 of 1 When using cat first aid to treat insect bites or stings, the first thing you should do is check if the stinger is still in your pet. If it is, try to carefully remove it with tweezers, making sure you don’t squeeze as you may release additional venom. If you’re worried, leave it in and take them to the vet so they can remove it for you. If the stinger is out, bathe the area with an alkali such as baking soda dissolved in cold water for bee or insect stings, or use lemon juice or vinegar for wasp stings instead. If you’re not sure what the insect was, use clean water instead. If the insect bite or sting is in your pets’ mouth, take them to the vet right away as it could swell and cause breathing difficulties. What to do if your cat is choking If your cat’s choking, wrap them in a towel and open their mouth. It’s important that you don’t tilt their head back as it may cause the object to fall down their throat, so you may need two people for this - one to hold and support the cat, and another to look inside the cat’s mouth for objects. If the object is visible and doesn’t appear to be attached to anything, take it out with blunt tweezers. If the object looks like it could be attached to something, don’t pull at it. Contact your vet and get them to the surgery right away. Cat first aid should only ever be used to help your cat until you can get to a veterinarian – it should never be used instead of professional care but in cases where immediate action is required. Always ensure that you have your vet’s number saved in your phone as you never know when you might need it. Explore our cat brands: c_brand_discovery (cat) Brand (field_product_brand) (entityreference filter) Dentalife Care for your pet's teeth daily with Dentalife's natural cleaning action. s DentalifeDental ChewsDENTALIFE® Dental Chicken Cat Treats 4.8 (5360) Online from Compare Prices DentalifeDental ChewsDENTALIFE® Dental Salmon Cat Treats 4.6 (42) Online from Compare Prices PreviousNext Related articles Cat Illness Symptoms 4 min read Unusual Cat Illness Symptoms To Watch Out For What Cats Eat 7 min read Harmful Substances and Poisonous Foods for Cats Guides To Cat Parasites 5 min read How to Remove a Tick from a Cat & Other Cat Ticks Questions Kitten Health 5 min read Cat and Kitten Insurance Newsletter Join our free kitten programme! Get weekly, pawsonalised kitten advice delivered straight to your inbox and receive unrivalled access to our expert team of in-house vets, behaviourists, and advisors. Advice and articles tailored to your pet's needs. Free access to our in-house team of vets, behaviourists and advisors. Discounts and offers from our brands. Join our newsletter Sign me up Purina Finding a pet Dog products Cat products Pet care hub Meet Purina Our impact Newsletter Purina Shop For our partners Breeders Veterinarians Call the pet care team Contact Us: UK: 0800 212 161 ROI: 1800 509368 Follow us facebook instagram twitter youtube ©Reg. Trademark of Nestlé S.A. Terms & Conditions Privacy Privacy settings Cookies Nestlé gender pay gap report Sitemap 

Today's AvailabilityAbout UsServicesOur ServicesUrgent CarePreventive CareSurgeriesDentalsTelehealthTravel CertificatesLocationsBostonChicagoConnecticutD.C. AreaLong IslandNew JerseyNew York CityWestchesterToday's AvailabilityOpening SoonWe're HiringWorking at BondOpen PositionsBenefitsVeterinariansNursesMoreBlogMedical RecordsRefer a FriendSwag ShopCareersLog InLog InBOOK NOWOpen menuClose menuMarch 15, 2023Cat First Aid: Essential Supplies and Basic ProceduresfacebooktwitterShare via e-mailTrue medical emergencies are impossible to predict and can be very scary. Fortunately, as a pet parent, there is a lot you can do to keep your kitty safe.Veterinary care should always be sought during an emergency. But in some cases, basic first aid administered right away (or on the way to the vet) can help keep a dangerous situation from getting even worse—and might even be life-saving.Here are some things any cat parent should know about cat first aid.What to Put in a Cat First Aid KitHere’s a list of commonly recommended items for first aid and emergency situations:Phone numbers and addresses of local emergency veterinarians and pet poison hotlines (ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center at 888-426-4435, or the Pet Poison Helpline at 855-764-7661). A pet carrier to transport your cat to a vet. A flashlight or headlamp.Latex or nitrile gloves.A large blanket or thick towels for picking up and moving your pet, or for keeping them warm.A pet thermometer, along with lubricant (KY jelly) for insertion if using a rectal thermometer.Instant cold packs for bruises and swelling.Tweezers for removing ticks or splinters.Saline eye wash.Tongue depressors.Styptic/blood clotting powder (especially for torn toenails).Wound cleaning and bandaging supplies.Appropriate liquids to flush and disinfect a wound. Chlorhexidine 2% and povidone iodine are good options, although both must be diluted. Don’t use hydrogen peroxide or alcohol to clean wounds as they can damage healthy tissues and delay healing (and alcohol stings!).Cotton balls and q-tips.Sterile gauze pads (including non-stick pads) and gauze roll.Bandaging tape.Self-adhesive vet wrap.Bandage scissors.Clean cloths or towels.Hydrogen peroxide 3% solution for inducing vomiting (but ONLY if your vet instructs you to do so). Your vet might also support you keeping Benadryl (Diphenhydramine) on hand for allergic reactions. Just talk to your vet first about safe formulations and dosages. Some things you should AVOID using include pain relievers (many are extremely toxic to cats!), sticky human bandages that could pull out your cat’s fur, and ointments or topical creams (unless your vet instructs otherwise) since cats could accidentally ingest them while grooming.SEE ALSO: Cat Sedatives: When and How to Use ThemBasic Emergency First Aid for CatsWhile different types of injuries and illnesses require their own specific steps, the following is a good overview of how to approach and assess a cat during a medical emergency.Secure the CatThis is important for the safety of cat and pet owner alike. Look for threats such as oncoming traffic, attacking animals, etc. When you can safely do so, approach the cat and move them to a safe area.Remember that distressed or painful cats might bite as a reflex or even try to run away. A large, thick blanket may help for restraint.Assess the Cat’s ConditionBe as quiet and calm as possible. This may help a cat feel less fearful. Avoid moving the cat more than necessary until you assess their injuries.Look for bleeding, bones at abnormal angles, or other obvious issues. Take note of anything unusual about the cat’s condition. Examples might include: lack of consciousness or responsiveness, difficulty breathing, or limping.Provide Emergency First AidIf you are comfortable in your assessment and first aid knowledge, take some steps to help the cat. Common examples are provided in the next section.Call the Vet to Let Them Know You’re On Your WayContact your veterinarian or an emergency vet’s office for specific advice. Informing the vet team that you are coming also helps them prepare—so they can receive and treat your cat immediately.First Aid for Common Cat EmergenciesRemember that veterinary care is still needed. Home care is rarely a substitute for professional assessment and medical treatment. But in many cases, basic first aid treatments help limit the damage of an injury until your pet reaches their veterinarian.Each situation is unique. Use these as a general guideline.External Bleeding and Open WoundsSevere blood loss can be fatal. And even minor wounds are at risk of infection.For bleeding, apply pressure with a clean cloth or gauze pad. Next, flush or clean the wound using supplies from your pet first aid kit. Gently dry the area, then apply gauze or bandaging material. Ensure wraps or bandages on the limbs aren’t so tight as to cut off circulation.If bleeding is copious or won’t stop after 5-10 minutes of consistent pressure, seek immediate veterinary care. Cover and protect the wound on the way to the veterinary hospital with bandaging materials or a clean cloth.BurnsIf you witness your cat burn themselves (by running across a hot stove, for example), immediately run cool or cold water over the area for a few minutes or cover it with cool, wet towels. Burns can be treated much like open wounds.Road AccidentsSerious and fatal injuries are common when a pet is hit by a car. Even if you don’t see any obvious wounds, internal bleeding or other internal injuries may be present. Seek immediate veterinary care.Due to the risk of spine injuries, place your cat in a sturdy box or bin for support during transportation.PoisoningIn some cases, inducing vomiting is recommended. In other cases—such as with sharp or caustic substances—vomiting could make things worse. So, don’t initiate vomiting unless your vet recommends it.Contact your veterinarian or a pet poison helpline right away. If possible, find the box or label for what your cat ingested, or a piece of the plant they ate, etc. This information will save time and allow more accurate treatment recommendations. Allergic ReactionWhile not very common, severe allergic reactions and anaphylactic shock can happen in cats. A few possible causes include vaccine reactions, insect bites or bee stings, or venomous snake bites. Anaphylaxis is life-threatening and requires immediate veterinary care. Clinical signs might include swelling of the face or muzzle, hives, sudden vomiting or diarrhea, difficulty breathing, or collapse. If you have a dose of Benadryl your vet has approved and you can safely administer it, this may help slow down the symptoms.HeatstrokeSymptoms might include lethargy/slowing down, restlessness, excessive grooming, panting or drooling, or collapse. Move your cat to a cooler spot (ideally air conditioning) immediately. Rinse them with cool (not cold) water. Use a fan for ventilation if possible. Take your cat to the vet right away.FightsCat fights and bite wounds are common in kitties who roam outside. But even indoor cats can get into tussles. Deep, narrow bite wounds are almost impossible to thoroughly clean and are at high risk of infection. You can do an initial cleaning at home, but still seek veterinary care because antibiotics are usually needed. Don’t place ointments like Neosporin because that could trap the infection inside.SEE ALSO: Can Cats Eat Sweets?Tips for Restraining and Transporting a Cat in an EmergencyEven the friendliest cats might bite when hurt or scared. Handle your cat as gently and minimally as possible until you know more about the nature of their injuries. If you will be treating wounds or administering first aid, it’s best to have someone help you restrain your cat. A thick blanket or towel is often the best way to pick up and move a cat, taking care to protect your hands from being bitten. This can also keep a cat warm and make them feel “hidden” so they feel safer.If you suspect broken bones or a back injury, try to assess the cat prior to moving them. Place the cat on a board or in a sturdy box or bin for transport.Always keep your own safety in mind. If you can’t help your cat without getting injured yourself, it might be best to skip first aid. Be especially careful when helping an unknown injured cat, since you don’t know their rabies vaccination status.What to Know About Shock in CatsWhat is Shock?Shock means a cat’s blood flow to crucial organs is limited. It can be fatal very quickly, or cause permanent damage to body tissues and organs even if a cat survives. Examples of causes include severe blood loss, heart or lung disease, traumatic injuries, heatstroke, anaphylaxis, etc.Signs of Shock in CatsSymptoms may include rapid pulse or respiratory rates, pale gums, listlessness, collapse, or unconsciousness. Cats might appear distressed or withdrawn, and additional symptoms like vomiting could occur.First Aid for Shock in CatsImmediate veterinary care is crucial!In the meantime, try to keep your cat warm (unless heatstroke is the cause) and calm. If breathing or heartbeats have ceased, CPR may be performed.SEE ALSO: How to Travel With a CatWhen and How to Perform CPR on CatMuch like human medical care, CPR in cats begins with the ABCs:Airway: Check that the airway is open. Use a tongue depressor rather than your fingers in your cat’s mouth, and have good lighting. Try to remove any obstructions like vomit or foreign objects.Breathing: If your cat isn’t breathing, administer rescue breaths. Place their head and neck in a straight line. Place your hand over your cat ’s muzzle while holding their mouth shut, or use a face mask designed for cats (some pet first aid kits include these) for a tight seal. Blow into the nostrils a few times. Watch for a response. If your cat does not start breathing on their own, administer a few breaths per minute as part of CPR.Cardiac function: Feel the chest just behind your cat’s elbow for a heartbeat. You can also learn to feel for a pulse on your cat’s inner thigh near the groin. If no heartbeat or pulse are detected and your cat isn’t breathing, you may begin chest compressions. Your cat should be lying on their side. Press down on the widest, middle part of the rib cage, compressing it approximately 1 inch (for an average sized cat—adjust as needed for small kittens). Repeat this at a rate of 100-120 compressions per minute, while pausing to administer a rescue breath approximately every 30 compressions.Unfortunately, most cats who require CPR don’t survive, because of the extent of their underlying illness or injuries. However, in a cat who will otherwise pass away without CPR, there is no harm in trying. It might keep a cat alive long enough to get to the veterinary hospital for life-saving medical treatments.When to Treat at Home Versus Seek Urgent or Emergency Veterinary CareWhen in doubt, it’s best to seek veterinary care. Some examples of conditions that should always warrant an emergency vet visit include being hit by a car, difficulty breathing, penetrating wounds into the chest or abdomen, broken bones, loss of consciousness, being unable to urinate, and many types of eye injuries. If your cat seems stable, you can call a veterinarian’s office for advice. They can guide you on whether your cat needs to come in right away or not.While many of the injuries discussed here are very serious and can be fatal, knowledge (of what to look for and how to administer first aid) is power. Prompt care can help many cats recover and continue living the life they love with their favorite human.Have any questions? Schedule an in-person or telehealth appointment. For urgent care, give us a call at our 24-hour BondAid helpline or come in right away.You Might Also LikeThe Core Vaccines Your Pet NeedsWhen it comes to disease and illness, one of the best ways to protect your pet is through prevention. As with humans, your pet’s routine vaccines are a crucial way to help your pet stay healthy from their puppy/kitten years into adulthood.Read moreHow to Handle a Broken NailLearn to identify, treat and prevent broken pet nails. Read our essential guide on maintaining strong and resilient nails in pets.Read moreEar Infections in Cats: Symptoms, Treatment & MoreEar infections in cats require immediate attention. Here are the most common cat ear infection symptoms to watch for + what to do next.Read moreBetter care,Right when you need itBook a visitStay in touchGet the scoop about events, promotions, and clinic openings.Enter your emailSubmitinstagramfacebooklinkedintwitterPhone: (212) 430-8335General inquiries: team@bondvet.comPress inquiries: press@bondvet.comLocationsBostonChicagoConnecticutD.C. AreaLong IslandNew JerseyNew York CityWestchesterNavigationHomeAbout UsOur ServicesSurgeriesDentalsSpays & NeutersWe're HiringBlogEventsSwag ShopManage Medical RecordsReferralsTelehealthPreventive CareUrgent CareKittenPuppyFAQTelehealth DisclaimerCancellation PolicyPrivacy PolicyAccessibility© 2023 copyright all rights reserved 

About Petplan Help & Contact How to Claim Log in/Register Trustpilot Toggle navigation Trustpilot Pet Insurance Dog Insurance Cat Insurance Rabbit Insurance Multipet Insurance Other Pet Insurance Insurance guides Pet Advice Dog Advice Puppy Advice Dog Breeds Cat Advice Kitten Advice Rabbit Advice Meet our experts Rehoming a Pet About Petplan Help & Contact How to Claim Log in/Register Get a quote Home Pet Advice Cat Essential first aid for your cat Essential first aid for your cat Approved by Brian Faulkner Veterinary SurgeonRSVS Registered Share the article Share via Email Share on LinkedIn Share via whatsapp Share on X Share on Facebook Share the article Share via Email Share on LinkedIn Share via whatsapp Share on X Share on Facebook From minor cuts and scrapes to more serious issues like collapsing and broken bones, Petplan veterinary expert Brian Faulkner advises how you can help and comfort your cat before taking them to the vet. We do everything we can to keep our cats safe — but sometimes accidents happen. While it’s always best that your cat receives professional treatment from a vet as soon as possible, there are some key first aid techniques you can use to help them immediately after an accident. What can I do if my cat is bleeding? The first thing to do is see if you can figure out where the blood is coming from, then assess the size and depth of the wound. If your cat lets you, apply firm pressure over the injury using a clean tea towel or handkerchief. If you have a first aid kit, you can wrap the injury with a bandage or some tape until you can take your cat to the vet. Bandaging the wound will help slow the flow of blood and also keep it as clean as possible. If your cat has been bitten by another cat, the bleeding tends to stop fairly quickly, but the wound will be very sore and could become abscessed. Often, bite injuries can tear deeper tissues as your cat tries to pull away. Don’t be tempted to give your cat any pain medication like aspirin at home, because these aren’t suitable for cats. Make an appointment with your vet so they can assess the wound and prescribe any necessary medication. What can I do if my cat has broken a bone? Road traffic accidents are a common cause of injuries to cats, and can result in broken bones. Sometimes, you might suspect your cat has a broken bone but you might not see any evidence other than them limping or showing signs of pain. In the case of a compound fracture though, you’ll clearly see a broken bone protruding. In either case, call your vet and make an appointment immediately. In the meantime, there’s not a lot you can do. For a compound fracture, you can try to lightly cover the injured area to keep it as clean as possible. Don’t try to apply a splint as it might end up making your cat’s injury worse. What can I do if my cat is choking? Cats rarely choke on round objects like small balls, as their airways are very well protected. But swallowing string or other household items they’ve decided to play with or chew on is a common reason for insurance claims. These objects can cause blockages and, in the case of string, can become tangled in your cat’s digestive system. If you suspect your cat has swallowed something and it’s either obstructing their airways or digestive system, the best thing to do is to make an appointment with your vet as soon as possible. In the meantime, keep an eye on your cat’s breathing. If you can see a blockage, don’t attempt to remove it yourself. Cat’s teeth are covered in bacteria and if you get bitten, it may result in a nasty infection. What can I do if my cat has stopped breathing? A cat’s breathing patterns can be very subtle and sometimes it may look like they’ve stopped breathing when they’re really in a deep sleep. If your cat is stressed or panicked, their breathing rate increases and it’s much easier to see them taking each breath. When checking your cat’s breathing, first look at their ribcage and see if you can notice it rising and falling. If it’s not obvious, you can hold a cold mirror against their nostrils. As they breathe, condensation should form. If your cat has stopped breathing, follow the instructions below and take them to the vet for an urgent appointment. What can I do if my cat has collapsed? If your cat has stopped breathing, or lost consciousness, and you can’t feel their heartbeat, you should call your vet for an urgent appointment. Performing mouth-to-nose cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) on cats isn’t recommended. In addition to the risks of contamination, their fragile rib bones can easily be broken or their heart and lungs can be accidentally punctured during compressions. Place your cat in the sternal position pictured above. This involves placing your cat on their tummy, with their front paws out ahead of them. The sternal position helps to straighten the airways and allows for better airflow while your cat’s rib cage can move unobstructed against the floor. If your cat won’t allow you to hold them in this position, it’s usually a good sign! Don’t force your cat as this may make them feel more stressed. Make an urgent appointment with your vet. In the meantime, see if you notice anything that may have caused your cat to collapse. Have they eaten something they shouldn’t, been hit by a car, or got into a fight? What can I do if I can’t feel my cat’s heartbeat? To check your cat’s heartbeat, place your finger either side of their ribcage, between their front legs. Apply gentle pressure and you should be able to feel their heartbeat. If you can’t, place your cat in the position described above and take them to the vet immediately. It can be worrying and scary when our cats hurt themselves. You know your cat best, so it’s always safest to take them to see your vet as soon as possible whenever you’re concerned. But by knowing how to perform some basic cat first aid, you can help keep your cat as calm and comfortable as possible while you get them there. Last updated: February 14, 2023 Rate this article: Share via Email Share on LinkedIn Share via whatsapp Share on X Share on Facebook Share this article: Back to top Newest articles Pet Insurance Quote Dog Insurance Quote Cat Insurance Quote Rabbit Insurance Quote Retrieve my Quote Petplan vet Petplan Business Allianz FAQs Pet Insurance Dog Insurance Cat and Kitten Insurance Rabbit Insurance Horse Insurance Terms and conditions Privacy and Legal Accessibility Complaints Press Enquiries Dog Care Cat Care Rabbit Care Dog Breeds Cavapoo Cockapoo Cocker Spaniel Golden Retriever Shiba Inu Cat Breeds Bengal Maine Coon Norwegian Forest Cat Ragdoll Siberian Follow us on Instagram Follow us on X Like us on Facebook Watch us on Youtube Follow us on TikTok Petplan is a trading name of Pet Plan Limited (Registered in England No. 1282939) and Allianz Insurance plc (Registered in England No. 84638), Registered office: 57 Ladymead, Guildford, Surrey GU1 1DB. Pet Plan Limited is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority. Financial Services Register No. 311969. Allianz Insurance plc is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority. Financial Services Register No. 121849. Pet Plan Limited is a subsidiary of Allianz Insurance plc. Fitz All Media Limited is an Appointed Representative of Pet Plan Limited. Live Chat Get a quote ×Close Home Dog Cat Rabbit Multipet Other Existing Customers Pet Advice About Petplan Help 

JavaScript seems to be disabled in your browser. For the best experience on our site, be sure to turn on Javascript in your browser. Links Compare () Knowledge Base Sign In Contact UsCreate an Account | Toggle Nav Search Trustpilot My Quote Cart 0 Shopping Cart Menu SectorsEmergency Services EquipmentFirst Aid Supplies for BusinessHospital SuppliesPharmaceutical SuppliesVeterinary Medical SuppliesRetail Wholesale First Aid SuppliesHealth, Beauty & Aesthetics SuppliesSports Medical Supplies Advanced Life SupportAirway ManagementBleed Control / Trauma EquipmentBlizzard SurvivalBurnsDefibrillatorsDiagnostic EquipmentEmergency Bags & BoxesEmergency LightingEvacuation, Immobilisation & Patient HandlingInjection & InfusionMaternity EquipmentSurgical InstrumentsTriage and Incident Management First AidBandages, Wound Dressings & SwabsBlankets & BeddingCreams, Lotions, Oils, & WaxEmergency Books & LeafletsEssentials & Sundry ItemsEyecare & ProtectionFirst Aid Bags & Boxes - EmptyFirst Aid - CateringFirst Aid KitsFirst Aid Stations & SignageFurnitureHot/Cold TherapyPlasters & Dressings StripsResuscitation & CPRScissors & TweezersSportTapes & StrappingWall Brackets Infection ControlAntibacterial Hand GelsBio-Hazard KitsDisinfectantsGlovesPaper & Papier-mâchéPPESharps Disposal KitsWipes PharmacyPrescription Only MedicinesPharmacy MedicinesGeneral Sales List TrainingAnatomical ModelsCPR Manikins & Choking TrainersDefibrillator Training UnitsDisposables Steroplast BrandAntibacterial Hand GelsBandages, Wound Dressings & SwabsBio-Hazard KitsBurnsDisinfectantsEmergency Books & LeafletsEyecare & ProtectionFirst Aid Bags & Boxes - EmptyFirst Aid KitsFirst Aid Stations & SignageHot/Cold TherapyMassage OilsPlasters & Dressings StripsResuscitation & CPRSharps Disposal KitsSportTapes & StrappingTrainingTrauma EquipmentWipes OffersSale Account Home Knowledge Base Cat First Aid: What to do in an Emergency Cat First Aid: What to do in an Emergency by Steroplast Healthcare 22 August 2021 Cat First Aid: What to do in an Emergency Cat First Aid: What to do in an EmergencyCat owners are likely used to living with an animal that enjoys his or her own space from time to time. But when a critical moment strikes your cat will need you more than ever. Being prepared for the possibility of an injury or illness is the best thing you can do for your cat. This guide will explain the basics of cat first aid to help you support your cat in the moments before it can be seen by a vet. How to Tell When a Cat is In PainCats can’t tell us when they are in pain, but as the owner of a cat, you will probably sense when something is wrong by noticing subtle changes in his or her behaviour. Look out for these warning signs to tell if your cat is experiencing discomfort:Eating less than normal. Sleeping more than usual. Limping or dragging limbs. Hiding in a dark safe-looking space more than usual. Grooming less, or grooming a particular spot more than usual. Disinterest in interaction with owners (you could test this by trying to play with your cat). Shallow breathing or breathing quickly (if breathing seems laboured it’s time to call the vet). Changes in toilet behaviour such as not using the litter tray (if your cat looks like it is trying to relieve itself but nothing is coming out you should call the vet). Acting aggressively towards people and other pets that the cat is normally happy to interact with (you might also hear it growling, hissing, or making low whining noises when it wouldn’t normally). When should you call the vet?Sometimes cats might be affected by something that isn’t threatening to their health. If they’ve had to travel somewhere in the car, or if they ate something that gave them an upset stomach, for example, they might spend a day or two recovering. If your cat is still acting in a dull or depressed way after a couple of days it’s a good idea to call the vet. They may need to go in for a check-up to make sure nothing needs medical attention. There are some instances when you should call the vet straight away because something more serious could be happening. Call the vet if your cat:Is vomiting repeatedly. Can’t urinate or defecate properly. Is having difficulty balancing or is walking strangely. Is acting distressed and appears to be in severe pain. Is breathing quickly, or breathing sounds raspy or laboured. Is having severe, ongoing diarrhoea, or diarrhoea that contains blood. Keep a copy of your vet’s number somewhere the family can access it, like on the fridge door or in your cat first aid kit. Here are some examples of signs of an emergency versus signs you should keep an eye on. If they get worse you should call the vet.When to call the vet immediatelyWhen to monitor your catYour cat is coughing or breathing in an unusual way for more than a few momentsYour cat coughs a few timesYour cat has persistent vomitingYour cat vomits once or twiceYour cat has severe, persistent diarrhoeaYour cat has diarrhoea a few timesYour cat has bleeding that doesn' stop for 10 minutes or has cuts that look severe.Your cat comes home with minor cuts that stop bleeding quicklyYour cat acts scared, aggressive, or doesn't seem to be 'fully there'Your cats behaviour changes slightlyYour cat is not eating at allYour cat is eating less or more than usualYour cat is not urinating or defacatingYour cat's toilet habits changeCat First Aid Kit Contents ChecklistHaving a cat first aid kit at home or in your car is one of the best things you can do to help your cat in a crisis. Here is a cat first aid kit list of essentials that will come in handy for a range of common cat injuries:First aid kit - cat essentials:Nitrile gloves Bandages Tweezers Scissors Sterile gauze swab Disinfectant wipes Other useful cat first aid supplies:Foil Blanket Tick Twister Sterile eye and wound wash Cohesive bandage to keep dressings and bandages in place Conforming bandage to support a strained joint The Stero-paws Cat First Aid Kit contains all of these items meaning you’ll be prepared for almost any emergency to give your cat the best support and help them on the road to recovery.The Stero-paws kit is the best cat first aid kit for giving your cat basic medical attention. The kit is compact and lightweight. It can also be clipped onto a bag or belt when you’re out and about. We also stock a full range of vet supplies like sterilisation equipment and animal wound care products. Order through our website and we can deliver your cat first aid kit UK wide no matter where you’re based. Cat First Aid Kit How to Feel for a Cat’s HeartbeatIf your cat is unconscious and you want to feel for a heartbeat place your fingers on either side of his or her ribcage just under the front legs. You don’t need to apply much pressure, just press gently but firmly when you find the right spot. If your cat’s heart rate feels very fast, remember that the normal heart rate for a cat is 160-180 beats per minute, which is much faster than a human’s. If you are worried about your cat’s heart rate you should call the vet. How to Pick up an Injured CatPick up an injured cat slowly and gently so as not to make him or her panic or experience more pain than necessary. The best way to pick up an injured cat is to put one hand on the chest just under the chin and the other hand under the belly in front of the back legs.If your cat is laying on his or her side and you don’t want to pick it up in this way (if the cat has a broken bone, for example), you could ask someone to help you slide your hands underneath their head, shoulders, belly and hips. Make sure your cat carrier is close by so you don’t have to move them very far.Cat First Aid: Open wounds and CutsIf a wound bleeds for longer than ten minutes after applying pressure, or if it is in the mouth or eye of a cat, they will need to go to see a vet straight away. Otherwise, there are some things you need to do to help your cat heal properly. Here are some steps for first aid for cats wounds:1. First, get your cat into a safe position to inspect it—safe for them and you. Ask someone to help you firmly hold your cat in place or wrap them in a blanket so they can’t bite or scratch you.2. Take a look at the wound to see if there is any debris inside it. If there is some shallow debris you might want to use a tweezer to gently pull it out but never go into a wound to extract debris. You could push it further in and make things worse. If you cannot clean the wound, call your vet to have them sterilise it properly.3. Cleaning and sterilising cats’ wounds are important steps to make sure they don’t get an infection. Use a syringe filled with water or sterile wound wash solution (this is included in our cat first aid kit), and rinse the wound a few times with fresh water or solution each time. 4. Monitor your cat over the next few days to check that the wound is healing properly. Signs of infection include reddening and swelling of the area. If you gently press on the area and it feels hot and hard this could mean an infection is developing. Luer Slip Tip Syringe First Aid for Cats Paw InjuriesCuts to paw pads present a bit more of a problem, with an increased chance of reopening and contamination as your cat walks around. Follow these steps for cat cut paw first aid:1. Check for debris in the cut. If there is something sticking out of the wound that you can easily grab with tweezers then remove it. If there is any deeper debris do not try to remove it yourself. This will need to be done by a vet. 2. Wash the wound with water or sterile wound wash solution.3. Apply pressure to the wound to stop bleeding. Small cuts should stop bleeding in a matter of moments but it if is a more severe injury you may need to apply pressure for longer. If bleeding doesn’t stop after 10 minutes take your cat to a vet clinic.4. Cover the wound with a sterile gauze swab. This will cushion the bottom of the cat’s foot.5. Use an Elastic Adhesive Bandage to bandage the cat’s foot and leg. Make sure to cover the toes fully to prevent swelling. Extend the bandage above the joint in the leg to stop it from slipping off.6. Check the bandage is not too tight by inserting a finger between the bandage and the cat’s leg.7. Book an appointment with your vet. They will need to properly examine the cut to make sure there isn’t a chance of infection.Steroplast’s Elastic Adhesive Bandage has adhesive on the outside, making it much easier to apply bandages to small animals. It’s also latex-free, provides ventilation, and comes with a central line to help guide you when applying a bandage. EAB Tear Lite Elastic Adhesive Bandage Other Cat Injuries and EmergenciesInjuryCall the vet immediatelyBook an appointment with vetNo vet necessaryBroken bones✔Heatstroke✔Choking✔DrowningElectric schockEye injuries✔Fights with other animals✔Fits✔Irritants on fur✔Poisoning✔Resuscitation✔Road accidents✔Stings and ticks ✔Tail injuries ✔ Broken BonesManage any bleeding and carefully move the cat into a carrier to be taken to the vet. Make sure the carrier is padded with soft blankets to absorb the impact of the road on the journey and make sure your cat won’t roll around. Never try to put a splint on a cat, you could risk causing them more pain or worsening the injury.Cat Heatstroke First AidRemove your cat from the source of heat and put them in a cool, dark, calm room. Dip your hands into a bowl of cold water and transfer the cold water to your cat’s fur by gently stroking them (do not use a spray bottle to spray your cat with cold water as this might make them panic). Then use an electric fan or manual fan to fan their fur. If you don’t have a fan you could use a large thin book or newspaper.Call the vet and arrange to take your cat for a check-up. Even if your cat looks like they are recovering they should still see a vet for heatstroke. ChokingYou will know your cat is choking because it will look like he or she is trying to vomit or cough something up. It might not be breathing and you might see the cat’s lips turn blueish. If you can, do a finger sweep of the cat’s mouth and check for any obstructions. Don’t push your finger down the throat as you could push the object further down. You might need someone to help you gently open the cat’s mouth. Don’t risk being bitten.You can give a cat the Heimlich manoeuvre by positioning their back against your stomach and putting your fist below their rib cage. Gently pull your fist in and upwards using two or three movements to see if you can dislodge the obstruction. DrowningMake sure their nose and mouth are free of obstructions and then hold your cat upside down by its back legs to drain water from its lungs. You may need to try to resuscitate your cat (see Resuscitation below). If your cat recovers it’s still important to see a vet as there could be complications further down the line.If a cat is drowning do not go into the water, instead, try to push a branch or piece of rope out for them to grab on to if it’s safe to do so.Electric ShocksMake sure you think about your safety when dealing with a cat that has suffered an electric shock. If it happens in your home, turn off the power and use a non-metallic object like a broom handle to push your cat away from the source of electricity. Check whether the cat is in water and make sure it is fully out of the pool of water before touching it. If the shock occurs through a different power supply, like power lines outside, do not approach and call the police instead. Check your cat’s pulse (see How to Feel for a Cat’s Heartbeat above). If the cat has a heartbeat but doesn’t appear to be breathing, attempt resuscitation (see Resuscitation below). Call the vet and arrange to bring your cat in.Eye InjuriesIf you can, wash your cat’s eye to remove any chemicals or debris affecting it. Put an Elizabethan collar on your cat to prevent rubbing of the eye with a paw and take them to the vet. If you don’t have an Elizabethan collar, you could wrap your cat firmly in a blanket to prevent him or her from rubbing their eye while you transport them to the vet. An eyewash kit is ideal for this, containing sterile eyewash solution and eyewash pods that give you precision when washing a very small eye like that of a cat. Sterowash Eye and Wound Wash Kit Fights with Other AnimalsA fight with another animal might not always be an emergency, but it is a good idea to book an appointment with your vet as your cat might need antibiotics. If your cat is severely injured, deal with any bleeding and call the vet to arrange an appointment. FitsIf your cat is having a fit they are likely to be quite distressed. Don’t try to restrain or touch your cat as this stimulation could make him or her feel more frightened or even make the fit go on for longer. Dim the lights and remove any loud noises, then make sure your cat is safe and won’t knock into any sharp objects or electric appliances. Call the vet and arrange to bring your cat in.Irritants on FurLots of substances can be brushed from your cat’s fur and you might even be able to bathe your cat depending on his or her demeanour. If you do bathe your cat use a mild soap designed for pet fur as other soaps could cause more irritation. If your cat has paint, tar, or other toxic chemicals like cleaning solutions on it, put on an Elizabethan collar if you have one to prevent him or her from licking the toxic substance from their fur. Call the vet and follow their advice. Your cat may need to be brought in for thorough bathing to make sure all of the toxic substance is removed.PoisoningCall your vet and arrange to bring your cat in. If you can find out what your cat has ingested, bring the packet which shows the ingredients, and a sample with you to the vet. If your cat ate or chewed a plant, bring a sample of the plant and find out what it is called. You could also take a picture to show your vet if you’re not sure. This could also help them determine how much the cat has ingested.Resuscitation1. Lay your cat on their side and open their mouth, or ask someone to help you.2. Pull the tongue forward and inspect the mouth for obstructions.3. Make sure the cat’s head is fully extended with its nose pointing forwards. 4. Hold your cat’s mouth closed by putting your thumb on his or her chin and your fingers over the top of their head. Be sure not to squeeze and block off their throat.5. Blow into the cat’s nose roughly ten times per minute.6. Feel for a heartbeat (see How to Feel for a Cat’s Heartbeat above). If there is no heartbeat, push on the chest just behind the front legs every two seconds.7. The process should look like this: 2 breaths followed by 15 chest presses.Keep giving your cat CPR until it a vet can see it or for up to three minutes. After three minutes, resuscitation is not likely. Our cat first aid kit contains a Resusciade One Way Valve that can be used to give an animal CPR without having to make contact with its mouth. Resusciade One Way Valve Road AccidentsIf you hit a cat in your car it’s important not to drive off, even if the cat looks okay. It is somebody’s pet and needs to be looked after. Pick up the cat (see How to Pick up an Injured Cat) and put them in a box or other container for transportation to the nearest veterinary clinic. If you can, keep the cat warm with a coat or blanket.Stings and TicksYou can remove a sting by pressing down around the poison sac or using a pair of tweezers to pull it out. Wash the area with water, or you could use a solution of bicarbonate of soda for a bee sting or diluted vinegar for a wasp sting. Arrange an appointment with your vet if the sting is in the mouth as there is a risk of swelling where breathing could be obstructed. Put on plastic gloves or use a tissue and part the hair around a tick. Take hold of the tick and gently pull it off. Do not squeeze around the base as you risk pinching off the jaws and leaving them in the cat’s skin. Wrap a tick well in tissue paper and then put it in the bin.Tail InjuriesArrange an appointment with your vet if your cat’s tail has been injured. Injuries to the tail can cause balance and bladder problems.Visit ourInteractive First Aid GuideDemystify workplace first aid & find out exactly what your business needs. Visit Guide Please enter your details into the form below along with any questions or comments and a member of our team will be happy to provide you with more information: I have read & accept the Privacy Policy < Previous Next > Related posts Learning Veterinary Surgical Instruments 1 February 2023 The Essential Pet First Aid Kit Checklist 17 November 2022 The Basics of Animal Wound Dressing 31 August 2022 A Guide to Veterinary Cleaning Products 28 August 2022 What should be included in a pet's first aid kit? 24 August 2022 Pet First Aid: A Guide to The Most Common Emergencies 12 August 2022 Veterinary Hazards: Staff Safety in Clinics and Practices 11 March 2022 A Ringworm Cleaning Protocol For Veterinary Exam Rooms 12 September 2021 A veterinary clinic cleaning protocol: What it is and what to consider 24 August 2021 The 3 Aims of First Aid in Animals and The Law 22 August 2021 Veterinary Infection Control Guidelines and Best Practices 17 August 2021 Health and Safety in a Veterinary Practice: UK Guidance 11 February 2021 How to Choose the Right Veterinary Wound Dressings 11 February 2021 Products mentioned in this article Cat First Aid Kit Regular Price £19.19 Special Price £15.98 £13.32 Add to Cart Luer Slip Tip Syringe Starting at £0.42 £0.35 Add to Cart Sterowash Eyecare Kits | Small, Medium, Large | 500ml Eyewash, 20ml Pods, Eyepads, Mirror | Eye & Wound Care Medical Case Rating: 100% 1 Review Starting at £20.34 £16.95 Add to Cart Resusciade CPR Face Shield | Roll of 36 — Disposable | Mouth-to-mouth Resuscitation Rating: 100% 1 Review £8.64 £7.20 Add to Cart The Lighthouse Club - Sterowash Eyecare Kits Starting at £19.14 £15.95 Add to Cart Aurelia Blue Nitrile Disposable Safety Gloves | Pack of 100 | Smooth, Ambidextrous, Powder-Free Starting at £8.34 £6.95 Add to Cart Comments Please login to comment. Don't have an account? Sign Up for free Get a Quote for Customer Name Customer Email Phone Number Comment Submit Your Account My Account Orders History Help Centre Knowledge Base Information Centre Buyers Guide 2023 Delivery Export Distributors White Label Medical Products Careers Referral Scheme Steroplast Healthcare Foundation GET IN TOUCH ADDRESS Unit 2, Alpha Point, Bradnor Road, Manchester, M22 4TE PHONE +44 (0)161 902 3030 EMAIL enquiries@steroplast.co.uk Registered Company No. 00504340 | VAT number: 145077275© Steroplast Healthcare Limited 2023 

Skip to main contentSign upThe Wildest Profile IconCat First Aid 101From performing CPR to preventing shock, three vets break down everything you need to know to help your cat in an emergency.by Avery FelmanJune 13, 2022EdNurg / Adobe Stock share articleTwitterFacebookPinterestEmailYour pet wants you to read our newsletter. (Then give them a treat.)Sign up for product updates, offers, and learn more about The Wildest, and other Mars Petcare brands. Must be over 16 years to sign up.I'm InSee our privacy statement to find out how we collect and use your data, to contact us with privacy questions or to exercise your personal data rights.You’ve heard the old adage: Cats always land on their feet. Well, sometimes they don’t, and since emergencies have a way of always happening at random hours when vet offices are closed (how convenient), it’s important to be prepared just in case. So we asked three veterinarians — Dr. Lynn Buzhardt, Dr. Ryan Llera, and Dr. Ernest Ward — to explain all things ER, from what “first aid” even means to how to help your cat in different scenarios. Then, author and adventure cat expert Laura Moss chimed in to share what’s in her cat’s first aid kit.What is first aid, anyway?Dr. Llera: First aid is initial treatment given in a medical emergency. Its purpose is to preserve life, reduce pain and discomfort, and/or minimize any risk of permanent disability or disfigurement.What’s the first thing to do in an emergency?Dr. Llera: Keep calm and assess the scene for any additional threats to you or your pet. This is important for everyone’s safety.Keep your cat warm (except in cases of heat stroke), as quiet as possible, and keep movement to a minimum, especially if there is possible trauma, broken limbs, or any symptoms of neurological damage.Contact your veterinary hospital, inform them of the situation, and get specific first aid advice.To safely move or transport an injured cat, use a suitable container such as a strong cardboard box or a cat carrier (remove the top for easy and safe access to the carrier; do not push an injured cat through the small door or opening). Place a blanket or thick towel over the patient.Get to the veterinary hospital as soon as possible.What if my cat is struggling?Dr. Ward: Most pets will be panicked or disoriented. The stress of an emergency can cause your otherwise friendly cat to act aggressively. Although many panicky animals respond to a calm, soothing voice, use caution when approaching or touching any injured animal.You can wrap the body of a frightened or unmanageable cat in a blanket or towel. Do not constrict the trachea or airway. If possible, leave the head exposed, unless the cat is very aggressive. Use caution if you are suspicious of a fractured bone or spinal injury, in which case you should lay the cat in a large box.Ask a VetPet health question that’s not an emergency? Our vet team will answer over email within 48 hours. So, go ahead, ask us about weird poop, bad breath, and everything in between.Get Pet HelpWhat if my cat goes into shock (and what does that even mean)?Dr. Ward: Shock is a whole body reaction to a number of situations. These include severe trauma, hemorrhage or sudden blood loss, heart failure, and other causes of decreased circulation (e.g. severe and sudden allergic reaction and heat stroke). A life-threatening fall in blood pressure is a dangerous part of shock. If not treated quickly and effectively, systemic shock may cause irreversible injury to body cells, and it can be fatal.Dr. Llera: Signs of shock include rapid breathing which may be noisy; rapid heart rate with a weak pulse; pale gums, lips, under eyelids; severe depression; cool extremities (limbs and ears), and vomiting. If your cat is showing any of these signs, keep them as quiet as possible and try to conserve heat by covering them with blankets, towels, or even newspapers. Then follow the A, B, Cs of first aid:AirwayAnything that obstructs the airway prevents oxygen entering the lungs. Do your best to clear the mouth and throat of any obstruction such as vomit, saliva, or other foreign material. Be careful — your pet may bite you in panic.BreathingIf the cat is unconscious and does not appear to be breathing, try gently pumping the chest with the palm of your hand, at the same time feeling just behind the elbow to detect a heartbeat or pulse. If this is unsuccessful, give the pet CPR (see below). Be careful — injured pets may bite you out of fear. If you are unsure about the health or vaccination status of the injured pet, avoid contact with bodily fluids and blood.HeartbeatIf you are unable to detect a heartbeat or pulse, or if it appears weak and slow, try pressing on the chest with your palm and elevate the lower half of the body to promote blood flow to the brain. Then perform CPR.How do I perform CPR on my cat?Dr. Llera: When you encounter an unresponsive cat, the first step is to ensure that there is an open airway.Carefully pull the tongue out of the mouth.Extend the head and neck so that they are in a straight line. DO NOT overextend the neck in animals that have obvious head and neck trauma.Carefully clear the mouth of any debris that may be obstructing breathing.Place your hand over the cat’s mouth and extend the neck. For cats, you can sometimes improvise with a styrofoam cup or other similar shaped object by putting the opening over the cat’s face and poking a large hole in the bottom for you to breathe through. Ensure a relatively tight seal around the muzzle.Blowing into the nostrils, give two to three breaths and watch for a rise in the chest. If you do not see a rise in the chest, reposition the neck or search for airway obstruction.If you believe there is an airway obstruction that you cannot see, turn the cat upside down, with the back against your chest. Give five sharp thrusts to the rib cage to try and expel any object.For CPR, provide 20 breaths per minute.If the cat fails to breathe on their own, you may attempt an acupressure maneuver. Press firmly with your fingernail or other hard object in the space between the nostrils and the upper lip. Do this for 10-30 seconds.What if my cat requires chest compressions?Dr. Ward: After you have established an airway and begun CPR, if there are still no obvious signs of life you should attempt chest compressions.Make sure there is no major bleeding. If there is bleeding, have an assistant manage the bleeding (see below) while you perform chest compressions.If possible, lay the cat on their right side.Feel for a heartbeat or femoral pulse. The femoral pulse is located inside the leg in the groin region. Cats do not have a readily palpable neck pulse.Bend the left forearm and note the location where the elbow touches the chest. This is close to the middle of the rib cage.Use one hand to compress the chest from both sides by putting your fingers on one side and your thumb on the other side of the chest. Compress the chest 100-120 times per minute. The rate should be about 30 compressions for every 2 breaths.Try to compress the chest wall at least 30-50%. This is about 1" (2 cm) in the average cat. Get your fix of The WildestWe promise not to send you garbage that turns your inbox into a litter box. Just our latest tips and support for your pet.Sign up for product updates, offers, and learn more about The Wildest, and other Mars Petcare brands. Must be over 16 years to sign up.Submit iconSee our privacy statement to find out how we collect and use your data, to contact us with privacy questions or to exercise your personal data rights.How can common emergencies be treated with first aid?Dr. Ward: Blood lossOnce you have followed A, B, C above, if the bleeding is severe, try to stop it. If bleeding is from a cut pad or paw, apply a dressing using a piece of absorbent bandage or clothing. If the bleeding persists and is soaking through the bandage, do not waste any more time and get to your veterinarian, since this is a medical emergency. Most bleeding wounds will require medical or surgical treatment. If the wounds are treated within four hours, they can often be sutured. Deep cuts treated after four hours have increased risk of infection and complication, and require more extensive surgery.Burns and scaldsCool the burned area with cold water as quickly as possible. Cover the burned area with damp towels. If the injury is due to a caustic substance, rinse with cold water for 15 minutes and contact your veterinarian for further advice. Animals that have been exposed to heat or smoke from a fire should be offered water as soon as the situation is stable.Eye injuriesInjuries to the eye are always very painful and can threaten the eyesight. If a foreign body (grass awn, hair, piece of a claw, etc.) can be seen, it may be possible to remove it by gently rinsing the eye with eye wash or contact lens saline solution (be sure to check that there are no other ingredients and it is ONLY saline solution). Do not allow the cat to scratch or rub the eye. Seek veterinary advice as soon as possible.What first aid is recommended for falls?Dr. Buzhardt: Sprains, broken bones, head trauma, and chest or abdominal injuries may result from a feline tumble. Serious injuries from falls need to be immediately evaluated and treated by a veterinarian, but here are first aid steps to implement at home as you prepare to take your cat to the veterinary clinic:Monitor breathingIf your cat struggles to breathe, proceed right away to the nearest emergency clinic. Remember that cats are “nose breathers,” so panting is a sign of respiratory distress. Transporting cats with respiratory problems need to be done very carefully, especially if ribs were broken. Support your cat behind the front legs and in front of the back legs and gently place them in a pet carrier. If you don’t have a pet carrier, use a rigid object like a baking sheet as a gurney. Cats with broken ribs should stay very still to avoid lung puncture, so don’t let them struggle — if they prefer to lie down or sit up, let them do it.Protect open woundsIf the skin was broken during the fall, wrap a clean towel over the area to minimize contamination. It is particularly important to cover a wound that has a broken bone protruding from it. Bone infections can seriously complicate healing. Puncture wounds to the abdomen should also be covered to minimize infection from outside contaminants; however, if the intestines are punctured, infection could start from within. Your veterinarian will assess this problem.Control bleedingIf the wound is bleeding, wrap the towel tightly around the injured site and apply gentle, but firm pressure. If the towel becomes soaked, do not remove it. Just put another towel on top of it to avoid disturbing the clot. Most bleeding stops within five to 10 minutes; however, cats with clotting disorders may take longer. Excessive bleeding may occur if the spleen or liver was injured, so prompt emergency care is vital.Monitor the cat for several hoursSometimes, cats appear normal after a fall as they walk around and play. Later, they become lethargic and weak or develop difficulty breathing, so it’s important to monitor them closely for several days after a fall. Delayed injuries include collapsed lungs caused by punctures from broken ribs, or hernias that start as small openings and rip open later. Diaphragmatic hernias occur when there is a tear in the wall separating the chest from the abdomen. If abdominal organs (liver, stomach, intestines) move into the chest cavity, respiration is impaired. Hernias may also occur in the abdominal wall, creating pockets that trap intestines, bladder, or other organs. These delayed problems are emergencies that require prompt attention. Transport the cat with the injured side down as you head to the veterinary clinic.Look for head injuriesBlood in the eyes, nose, or mouth means possible head injury. Cats will usually swallow blood that pools in the mouth and lick blood that flows from the nose, so there is no need to control the bleeding. Just proceed to the veterinary clinic.Be aware of back injuriesA cat that can’t get up at all may have sustained a back injury and should be kept as still as possible. Gently place the cat on a rigid object like a baking sheet. Cover them with a blanket and seek emergency help.Monitor eating and bathroom habitsBroken jaws occur frequently when cats fall. Watch your cat eat and drink. If they drop food, yelp when they chew, or drool excessively, have them examined by your veterinarian. Monitor their peeing and pooping. If they don’t have a normal BM within 48 hours or if they don’t pee within 24 hours, seek help. Your cat may have ruptured their bladder or the bladder may be impinged in an abdominal hernia. Lack of normal urination and defecation can be signs of something serious.What should I have in my cat’s first aid kit?Laura Moss: Whether you’re adventuring with your cat or just lounging around at home, it’s important to have these things on hand (preferably in a waterproof case), in the event of an emergency. Here’s what your feline first-aid kit should contain?Phone numbers and addresses for your veterinarian, the local 24-hour emergency vet and the ASPCA Poison Control Center: (888) 426-4435Cat First Aid bookPaperwork for your cat (The Humane Society suggests including proof of rabies-vaccination status, copies of other important medical records, and a current photo of your pet.)Any medication your vet has prescribedAbsorbent gauze padsAdhesive tapeAntiseptic wipes, lotion or sprayCotton balls or swabsHydrogen peroxideEyewash (The human version is OK to use.)Ice packNon-latex disposable glovesRectal thermometerPetroleum jelly to lubricate the thermometerGauze rollsSterile non-stick gauze pads for bandages (The Humane Society recommends self-cling bandages. This type of bandage sticks itself — but not to fur — and is available at pet stores.)Scissors with blunt endsTweezers or tick key (Your cat should be up to date on flea, tick, and heartworm treatments before heading outside.)Related articlesYou Need This Customizable, Vet-Designed First Aid Kit for DogsJust in case.9 Unexpected To-Dos for New Pet ParentsSound advice from seasoned dog and cat parents who have been there.Should Your Cat Go to the ER?Here are six good reasons to haul tail to the emergency room.Tagscatcat productscat safetycat healthAvery FelmanAvery is an editor at The Wildest. She has written for numerous publications, including Refinery29, BuzzFeed, and V Magazine. She lives in Brooklyn, New York with her fiancé and cat, Chicken, and has high hopes that one of them will let her adopt a dog.Avery FelmanWebsiteSecondary navigationHealthNutritionBehaviorLifestyleGroomingShoppingToolsPoodleAbout UsCollectiveContact UsAccessibilityTerms of ServiceAd ChoicePrivacy NoticeYour Privacy Choices Cookie ManagementCookie PolicySign up for product updates, offers, and learn more about The Wildest, and other Mars Petcare brands. Must be over 16 years to sign up.Submit iconSee our privacy statement to find out how we collect and use your data, to contact us with privacy questions or to exercise your personal data rights.Facebook Instagram Tiktok Twitter ©2023, Kinship Partners, Inc. an affiliate of Mars Incorporated | Ver. 0e040ba 

Skip to content Home About Our Team FAQ Client Reviews Our Partners Cat Sitting Cat Boarding Locations Boarding Requirements Boarding Guide News Contact Menu Home About Our Team FAQ Client Reviews Our Partners Cat Sitting Cat Boarding Locations Boarding Requirements Boarding Guide News Contact Book Now 12 First Aid Basics That All Cat Owners Should Know / Cat Care / By Chua Shermaine While no one can be completely prepared for all sorts of emergency situations that could befall our beloved kitties, there are some basic first aid procedures that we as pet parents ought to be familiar with. This way, we know how to respond in case of a medical emergency. Being able to administer first aid properly could save your cat’s life! Before we delve into the 12 first aid basics that you need to know about, here’s a question for you: Have you prepared a first aid kit for your cat? A well-stocked first aid kit where everything you would need in an emergency is in one place would be extremely helpful. Having everything in one place eliminates the panic that is bound to arise when you can’t find the things you need quickly in an emergency. Here are some items that we as responsible pet parents should minimally have in our first aid kits: Know Your Cat’s Normal Vital Signs Familiarizing yourself with what’s normal for your cat is important because then you’d know if something’s off. As a general guideline, your feline’s body temperature, pulse and respiration should fall within the following ranges: Temperature: 38°C – 39.2°C Pulse: 160-240 per minute (measure by pressing your first two fingers against the inside of your cat’s upper hind leg) Respiration: 20-30 per minute (measure by watching the rise and fall of your cat’s chest; count either inhalations or exhalations) It is best to take these measurements of your cat while it is healthy and relaxed and use it as a gauge. What to Do If Your Cat Isn’t Breathing Open your cat’s airway by extending its neck until it appears as straight as possible. Then, gently pull its tongue out of its mouth. Check to see if there’s anything lodged in your cat’s throat that might be blocking its airway. Position your cat such that it is lying on its side Hold your cat’s mouth closed with your hand and blow air into its nose until you see your cat’s chest expand. Once your cat’s chest expands, continue blowing air into its nose once every 4 or 5 seconds until your cat starts breathing on its own again. What to Do If Your Cat Doesn’t Have a Heartbeat Only begin chest compressions when you’re absolutely certain that there’s nothing in the way of your cat’s airway. Lay your cat on its right side on a flat and firm surface. Your cat’s heart is located on the left side of its body just behind the elbow of its front left leg. Place one palm over your kitty’s heart and your other hand underneath your cat’s chest. Push down on your cat’s chest as you begin compression but be careful not to push too hard. Compress 1 time per second and perform 5 compressions before giving your cat a breath (refer to the previous section!). Check for heartbeat. If there’s still no heartbeat, repeat 5, pausing after each breath to check for heartbeat. Continue CPR until your cat’s heart is beating again or until 20 minutes have passed and there’s still no response. Even when your cat’s heartbeat returns, take him to the veterinarian immediately. Other First Aid Basics You Need to Know About Image Source: Pixabay Bleeding First and foremost, keep your cat calm. Then grab clean towels to staunch the bleeding. If the blood begins seeping through, wrap another tight layer around the wound and press firmly. Take your cat to see a veterinarian immediately. If you have a well-stocked first aid kit, place a non-stick dressing on your cat’s bleeding wound and layer it with bandage. After that, place yet another layer of cotton wool over it and cover it again with a bandage. Secure this to your kitty’s fur by using a surgical tape. Next, cover it with adhesive bandage. Never leave a bandage on for more than 24 hours. Burns and Scalds Run cold (not icy) water over the burn for at least five minutes before seeing a vet. Do not apply any creams or treatments – this may cause more harm than good. Poisoning If you suspect that your cat might have consumed or come into contact with something poisonous, act quickly. Do not wait until the first signs of poisoning to rear its ugly head to contact your vet. If you’ve identified the source of poisoning, take your cat away from it immediately. Bring a sample of the poison with you to the vet so the veterinarian knows the best course of action to proceed with to counteract the poison. Do not force or encourage your cat to vomit. Fits Refrain from holding your cat when it is having a fit. Instead, reduce any noise where possible and darken the room. Remove anything near your cat so that it doesn’t hurt itself and let the fits run its course. If the fits doesn’t stop, your cat needs to go to the veterinarian ASAP. Fracture Pain makes cats lash out so speak to your cat in soothing tones and try not to make any sudden movements. Place an Elizabethan collar around your cat’s neck to help restrain it. Then, fashion a stretcher out of a board with a firm surface so that you can transport your cat to the veterinarian without jostling its injured leg too much. Secure your cat to the stretcher by wrapping a blanket around it. Choking Try pulling the object out of your cat’s mouth as soon as possible but be cautious about it – your cat might accidentally chomp down on your fingers as you do so. Get your cat’s mouth open by putting one hand over the top of its muzzle and then gently apply pressure to its upper lips with your thumb on one side and your fingers on the other. Next, use your other hand to coax its lower jaw down so that you can pull its tongue forward and see into the back of your cat’s mouth. If this doesn’t work, try holding your cat firmly by its hind legs and hang it upside down. The object stuck in its throat might fall out. Do not shake your cat. If this doesn’t work either, you will need to perform the Heimlich maneuver on your poor kitty. First, hold your cat such that its back is against your front. Next, position your fist into the soft spot below your cat’s ribcage. Pull your fist towards yourself and slightly upwards quickly. Repeat this two or three times. Once you’ve managed to get whatever that is stuck in your cat’s throat out, check to ensure that your cat is breathing normally. If this doesn’t work either, you will need to take your cat to the vet. Continue with the Heimlich maneuver as you make your way to the veterinary. Read more: Understanding Your Cat’s Body Language Eye Injuries Before you do anything else, place an Elizabethan collar on your kitty so that it doesn’t rub its eyes with its paws. In the event that the injury is the result of your cat accidentally getting chemicals into its eyes, dribble some water over your cat’s eyes to flush out the chemicals. Then, call the vet. Fever Normal temperatures of a healthy cat are between 38°C and 39.2°C. If you suspect that your cat has a fever, use a rectal thermometer to take its temperature. If it is 39.4°C or higher, your cat definitely has a fever. Lower your cat’s body temperature by dampening its fur with cool (again, not icy) water and placing it near a fan. As soon as its temperature has gone down, stop. If, however, your cat’s temperature reaches 40.6°C and higher, take it to the vet right away. Having such high temperatures is potentially life threatening. Heatstroke Just like dealing with fever, lower your cat’s body temperature by moistening its coat with water and place it somewhere cool or near a fan. Then, call your vet. Stings The first thing to do when your cat has been stung by a bee or a wasp is to pull out the sting. When you’ve extracted the sting, clean the area with water and apply a solution of bicarbonate of soda if it’s a bee sting and apply diluted vinegar if it’s a wasp sing. After that, press some ice to the spot to reduce heat. In an emergency, sometimes the time it takes to get to the closest vet is time we cannot afford. Those precious minutes could mean the difference between life and death for our cats. This is why it’s always useful to know some basic first aid. Take note that first aid care should not be a substitute for veterinary care but it sure can save a life. Read more: How to Identify Dehydration in Your Cat *Featured Image Source: Pixabay References: American Veterinary Medical Association. https://www.avma.org/public/EmergencyCare/Pages/Basic-Pet-First-Aid-Procedures.aspx. Arnold, Brooke. 2019. “Kitty First Aid Basics – The Catington Post”. The Catington Post. https://catingtonpost.com/kitty-first-aid-basics/. “Basic First Aid For Cats | Blue Cross”. 2019. Blue Cross. https://www.bluecross.org.uk/pet-advice/basic-first-aid-cats. HQ, Catster. 2019. “The Basics Of Cat First Aid | Catster”. Catster. https://www.catster.com/cat-health-care/cat-first-aid. LLC, Aquanta. 2019. “First Aid For A Cat With A Broken Bone”. Cathealth.Com. https://www.cathealth.com/cat-care/safety/2394-first-aid-for-a-cat-with-a-broken-bone. LLC, Aquanta. 2019. “First Aid For Coughing And Choking In Cats”. Cathealth.Com. https://www.cathealth.com/cat-care/safety/2397-first-aid-for-coughing-and-choking-in-cats. Pena, Melvin. 2019. “17 Essential Items For A Well-Stocked Cat First-Aid Kit | Catster”. Catster. https://www.catster.com/lifestyle/cat-health-emergency-tips-pet-first-aid-kit-essentials. “Poisoning In Cats”. 2019. Cats.Org.Uk. https://www.cats.org.uk/help-and-advice/poisoning. Post navigation ← Previous PostNext Post → Search for: Search Categories Cat Boarding Preparations Cat Care News Promotions Uncategorized Recent Posts Changes to Check-In/Check-Out Policy (From April 2023) 10% OFF Stays for First Timers Preparing Your Cat for Holiday Boarding Blackout Dates Nekomori Cat Salon- Full Services Available Archives Archives Select Month April 2023 July 2022 February 2022 December 2020 June 2020 April 2020 March 2020 February 2020 January 2020 December 2019 November 2019 October 2019 September 2019 August 2018 June 2018 November 2017 October 2017 September 2017 July 2017 June 2017 April 2017 March 2017 February 2017 January 2017 December 2016 September 2016 Board With UsBook a Viewing: 6288 3636 Compare Our Outlets More InfoFrequently Asked Questions Boarding Requirements Boarding Preparation Contact Us VisitNeko Neko Group Neko Neko Online Store Nekomori Cat Salon Locate Us 9 King Albert Park #02-20, Singapore 598332 59 Kampong Bahru Road #02-02, Singapore 169367 247A Jalan Kayu #02-01, Singapore 799471 Copyright © 2023 Nekoya Cat Hotel 

Skip to content Quote My account Dog Dog Dog insurance Accident Only dog insurance Time Limited dog insurance Max Benefit dog insurance Lifetime dog insurance Puppy insurance Older dog insurance Dog advice Dog advice Dog breed health conditions Dog owner checklist Vet fees for dogs Dog loss or death Dog maintenance and safety Dog training and behaviour Puppies Dog health problems Dog first aid Dog breed guides Travelling with dogs Food and diet advice Dog blog Vet fees for dogs Cat Cat Cat insurance Accident Only cat insurance Time Limited cat insurance Max Benefit cat insurance Lifetime cat insurance Kitten insurance Older cat insurance Cat advice Cat advice Cat owner checklist Vet fees for cats Cat loss and death Cat food and diet Cat training and behaviour Cat maintenance and safety Cat health guide Buying a cat Cat blog Vet fees for cats Horse & Rider Horse & Rider Horse & Rider insurance Standard Horse insurance Mature Horse insurance Rider insurance Foal insurance Horse advice Horse advice Horse owner checklist Horse maintenance and safety Horse blog Save animals with us Save animals with us How we can help your charity Apply for funding Charities we support Charities we support All Dogs Matter Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust Animal SOS Sri Lanka Animal Welfare of Luxor Birmingham Dogs Home Born Free Brent Lodge Bird and Wildlife Trust British Divers Marine Life Rescue British Hen Welfare Trust Cats Protection David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation Four Paws Freshfields Animal Rescue Harper Asprey Wildlife Rescue HART Wildlife Rescue Hawk Conservancy Trust Hope Rescue International Otter Survival Fund K9 Focus Lluest Horse and Pony Trust Mane Chance Sanctuary Margaret Green Animal Rescue Orangutan Appeal UK RSPCA Secret World Wildlife Rescue SPANA Stray Cat Rescue The Bat Conservation Trust The Donkey Sanctuary The Shark Trust The Tree Council Thin Blue Paw Tracker Academy Tusk Trust Whale and Dolphin Conservation Wildlife Aid Foundation Wildlife Vets International Willows Animal Sanctuary World Land Trust About us Campaigns Campaigns Make Chips Count Help end whaling in the Faroe Islands Pet Theft Finn's Law Animal welfare blog A Tail of Hope “Ugly” Endangered Animals Pet tools & resources Pet tools & resources Video vet consultation app Pet help and advice Pet insurance terms explained The Great Outpaws Pet obesity Dog theft prevention Pet affordability hub Pre-existing conditions Podcast Product Reviews Our Friends Online Pharmacy Existing customers Vets Pawtal Contact Help Existing customers Vets Pawtal Contact Help Quote My account Dog Dog Dog insurance Accident Only dog insurance Time Limited dog insurance Max Benefit dog insurance Lifetime dog insurance Puppy insurance Older dog insurance Dog advice Dog advice Dog breed health conditions Dog owner checklist Vet fees for dogs Dog loss or death Dog maintenance and safety Dog training and behaviour Puppies Dog health problems Dog first aid Dog breed guides Travelling with dogs Food and diet advice Dog blog Vet fees for dogs Cat Cat Cat insurance Accident Only cat insurance Time Limited cat insurance Max Benefit cat insurance Lifetime cat insurance Kitten insurance Older cat insurance Cat advice Cat advice Cat owner checklist Vet fees for cats Cat loss and death Cat food and diet Cat training and behaviour Cat maintenance and safety Cat health guide Buying a cat Cat blog Vet fees for cats Horse & Rider Horse & Rider Horse & Rider insurance Standard Horse insurance Mature Horse insurance Rider insurance Foal insurance Horse advice Horse advice Horse owner checklist Horse maintenance and safety Horse blog Save animals with us Save animals with us How we can help your charity Apply for funding Charities we support Charities we support All Dogs Matter Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust Animal SOS Sri Lanka Animal Welfare of Luxor Birmingham Dogs Home Born Free Brent Lodge Bird and Wildlife Trust British Divers Marine Life Rescue British Hen Welfare Trust Cats Protection David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation Four Paws Freshfields Animal Rescue Harper Asprey Wildlife Rescue HART Wildlife Rescue Hawk Conservancy Trust Hope Rescue International Otter Survival Fund K9 Focus Lluest Horse and Pony Trust Mane Chance Sanctuary Margaret Green Animal Rescue Orangutan Appeal UK RSPCA Secret World Wildlife Rescue SPANA Stray Cat Rescue The Bat Conservation Trust The Donkey Sanctuary The Shark Trust The Tree Council Thin Blue Paw Tracker Academy Tusk Trust Whale and Dolphin Conservation Wildlife Aid Foundation Wildlife Vets International Willows Animal Sanctuary World Land Trust About us Campaigns Campaigns Make Chips Count Help end whaling in the Faroe Islands Pet Theft Finn's Law Animal welfare blog A Tail of Hope “Ugly” Endangered Animals Pet tools & resources Pet tools & resources Video vet consultation app Pet help and advice Pet insurance terms explained The Great Outpaws Pet obesity Dog theft prevention Pet affordability hub Pre-existing conditions Podcast Product Reviews Our Friends Online Pharmacy Cat Cat advice Cat health guide Basic first aid for cats Cat Cat advice Cat health guide Basic first aid for cats Basic first aid for cats Cats are inquisitive animals by nature and since they often spend so much time exploring alone, curiosity can really end up hurting our feline friends. For that reason, you may one day find your cat needing medical attention and you could be required to perform basic first aid on them until you’re able to get them to a vet. As scary as the situation can be, it’s essential to keep calm when providing your cat with first aid as injured animals may try to bite or scratch in fear or pain. In this article, we’ve shared the basic first aid equipment that every cat owner should have, along with the three most common ways to provide first aid to your pet. Things to remember Along with remaining calm throughout the process, you should contact your vet as soon as possible. When explaining your cat’s injury, they may advise you to perform a different form of first aid that is more suitable for their condition. Never: Give human medicine to a cat as this can be life-threatening. First aid kit You should keep a first aid kit for your cat in a place in your home that is easily accessible, and always remember to take it with you if you’re travelling with your pet. There’s no need to pack hundreds of medical items. A basic first aid kit for your pet should include: Surgical sticky tape Bandages Non-adhesive dressings Blunt-ended scissors Antiseptic wipes A towel Most common requirements for first aid Whilst there are a variety of accidents that could result in your cat needing first aid, the following are some common injuries and illnesses. Burns Similar to humans, burns on your cat’s skin must be run under cold, running water for at least five minutes for the temperature to cool. If your cat becomes distressed (lashing out, panting, vocalising) stop trying to wet the burns and get them to your vet as quickly as possible for pain relief and further treatment. It’s important to keep the rest of their body warm whilst soothing their burns. This can be done by gently wrapping them in a fluff-free blanket or dry towel, avoiding the burn. Do not: Apply any ointments or creams to their injury. Poisoning Another potential requirement for performing first aid can happen when your cat has consumed something toxic. Items such as household cleaning items, human food like chocolate and things found in the garden could be poisonous to your cat and can result in them vomiting or experiencing diarrhoea. Unless advised specifically by your vet, never force your cat to vomit as this can actually cause more harm than good. Instead, try and find out exactly what your pet has consumed that could have caused the poisoning. This information may be able to help your vet provide your cat with better treatment. Important: Contact your vet as soon as it happens or you suspect they have eaten something toxic. This will provide the best chances of helping your cat and reducing any further complications. Bite wounds Bite wounds very often get infected because of the high concentration of bacteria in the mouth. Larger wounds can result in significant blood loss. Always have your cat checked by your vet if they have been bitten or attacked, even if there are no obvious concerns. Bite wounds can be more serious than they look because of hidden damage below the skin. What to do if your cat has a bite wound First, check your pet: Is your cat conscious? If NOT, phone your vet immediately to let them know you are coming and take your cat straight to your vet. Be careful moving them as there may be internal injuries so try to keep their body as still as possible and transport them on a flat surface. Try to use a secure cat carrier in case they regain consciousness during the journey. If you have a plastic cat carrier, these normally come apart around the middle, don't try and put your cat through the door at the front. Simply take the top half off and place them carefully into the bottom of the carrier before securing the lid back on for transport. If partially, you will still need to call your vet and take your cat in to be checked urgently. Be slow, quiet and careful with your handling as partially conscious animals will be confused and likely in pain and may bite or scratch if frightened, even if they are normally very friendly. You can use a thick towel or blanket over your hands if needed to help protect yourself while carefully moving your pet. Is your cat breathing? Look at their chest, is it moving with the breaths? IF NOT call your vet immediately as they may advise you to do CPR. IF they are breathing, check them for wounds. Book an appointment with your vet but be sure to explain the circumstances so they can prioritise your visit if needed. Second check: Is there severe bleeding? IF YES, apply pressure to the wound and go to the vet immediately. IF NO and your pet looks fine. Clean the wound with salted water (1 tsp to 500ml of water) as best as possible. Book an appointment with your vet but be sure to explain the circumstances so they can prioritise your visit if needed. Road traffic accident (RTA) If your cat has been involved in a traumatic accident be very careful when moving them. All pets that have been in a road traffic accident should be checked by a vet as there could be internal injuries that need veterinary attention. What to do if your cat was in a road traffic accident First, check your pet: Is your cat conscious? If NOT, phone your vet immediately to let them know you are coming and take your cat straight to your vet. Be careful moving them as there may be internal injuries so try to keep their body as still as possible and transport them on a flat surface. Try to use a secure cat carrier in case they regain consciousness during the journey. If you have a plastic cat carrier, these normally come apart around the middle, don't try and put your cat through the door at the front. Simply take the top half off and place them carefully into the bottom of the carrier before securing the lid back on for transport. If partially, you will still need to call your vet and take your cat in to be checked urgently. Be slow, quiet and careful with your handling as partially conscious animals will be confused and likely in pain and may bite or scratch if frightened, even if they are normally very friendly. You can use a thick towel or blanket over your hands if needed to help protect yourself while carefully moving your pet. Is your cat breathing? Look at their chest, is it moving with the breaths? IF NOT call your vet immediately as they may advise you to do CPR. IF they are breathing, check them for wounds. Book an appointment with your vet but be sure to explain the circumstances so they can prioritise your visit if needed. Is there any constant bleeding? IF YES apply pressure to the wound. You can do this by placing a thick piece of material (such as a towel or piece of clothing) firmly over the area and covering it with non-adhesive dressing, keeping it held down with cotton wool or tape. Take them to a vet immediately. Gently move them to a safe place: Avoid touching the painful area as much as possible. Avoid moving your cat too much in case there are internal injuries. Don’t let them walk or move around until you speak to your vet. Call your vet. Fit or seizure A seizure is an episode of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain, which can result in involuntary tremors or full-body convulsions. Do not hold or try to comfort your cat as this could prolong their fit. What to do if your cat is having a fit or seizure Stay calm and look at your surroundings: DO NOT cuddle your cat or cover them. DO NOT put your fingers in their mouth. Clear the space around your pet, and use cushions or soft materials to prevent any fall or injury during the fit. Remove other pets or children from the area. Switch off any music or television or keep the noise level at a minimum. Turn off lights or close curtains. These are all important to reduce the fitting time and keep you and the cat safe. If you can, monitor the time or ideally record the seizure so that you can show your vet. Recovering period: Monitor how long it takes for them to recover completely. Note their behaviour after the fit, are they confused? Or did they recover straight away? Be prepared to stay with them if they are confused, as they may inadvertently hurt themselves or put themselves at risk. Check if they have relieved themselves during the fit so that you can clean up. Report all this information to your vet. When you call, they might advise you to take your pet in once they’re fully recovered. Electric shocks Pets chewing electrical cords or cables are a common cause of electrical injury, with some being unfortunate enough to be struck by lightning. Electric shocks can cause burns, organ damage and death in cats, so it’s important to know what to do when it happens. Stop the shock: Turn off the power switch! If you can’t do this safely then make sure to turn the main fuse box off. DO NOT try to move them directly with your hands, as you may be electrocuted. Non-conductive materials can help but you must be very careful about which product you use and assess if it’s safe for you to attempt to remove your cat. When it’s safe to do so, check your pet: Is your cat conscious? If NOT, phone your vet immediately to let them know you are coming and take your cat straight to your vet. Be careful moving them as there may be internal injuries so try to keep their body as still as possible and transport them on a flat surface. Try to use a secure cat carrier in case they regain consciousness during the journey. If you have a plastic cat carrier, these normally come apart around the middle, don't try and put your cat through the door at the front. Simply take the top half off and place them carefully into the bottom of the carrier before securing the lid back on for transport. If partially, you will still need to call your vet and take your cat in to be checked urgently. Be slow, quiet and careful with your handling as partially conscious animals will be confused and likely in pain and may bite or scratch if frightened, even if they are normally very friendly. You can use a thick towel or blanket over your hands if needed to help protect yourself while carefully moving your pet. Is your cat breathing? Look at their chest, is it moving with the breaths? IF NOT call your vet immediately as they may advise you to do CPR. IF they are breathing, check them for wounds or burns. Then wrap your pet up to keep them warm. Call a vet. So now you have some basic first aid tips for your cat, you can be more prepared in case the worst should happen. These should not be used in place of a trip to the vet but should be used to keep your pet safer and more comfortable whilst on your way to the clinic. Share this article: Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Looking for more cat advice? We’ve written some handy cat advice guides, to help you unlock the secrets of your mysterious moggy. Browse all categories Need cat insurance? Cat insurance can help cover the cost of veterinary treatment if your cat gets injured or falls ill. Learn about our cat insurance policies We know pets Animal Friends Insurance is a multi-award winning FCA-regulated pet insurer, founded in 1998 to provide industry-leading pet insurance and first-class animal care to create a better life for every animal. As one of the UK’s largest pet insurance providers, Animal Friends works with vets, veterinary professionals, and partners pioneering the latest veterinary technology & healthcare advancements to achieve our vision. Our policyholders have helped donate over £7.8 million to more than 700 animal charities worldwide and by educating and inspiring others to act on current events and responsible pet ownership, Animal Friends is driving positive change for animal welfare and conservation. Dog insurance Cat insurance Horse & Rider insurance Save animals with us Pet tools & resources Make a claim FAQs Existing customers Vets Pawtal Contact Careers Complaints Refer a friend Customer reviews Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn Tiktok About us Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Terms and conditions Media Centre Our Friends Modern slavery statement Accessibility Bug Bounty Partner up with us Animal Friends Insurance is a trading name of Animal Friends Insurance Services Limited (Registered in England #3630812, VAT #975288368), authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority. Financial Services Register No. 307858. Registered Office: Animal Friends House, The Crescent, Sun Rise Way, Amesbury, Wiltshire SP4 7QA. The charitable work undertaken by Animal Friends Insurance is not regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority. 

You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. 

10% OFF on ALL Training Supplies! Use Coupon Code TEACH0923 at checkout! Shop Now > 10% OFF on ALL Training Supplies! Use Coupon Code TRAINING0723 at checkout! Shop Now > FREE SHIPPING on ALL Books & DVDs! Use Coupon Code SHELF0723 at checkout! Shop Now > Menu main menu Training + Certification: Individuals Online Only Find an Online Class Adult, Child and Baby First Aid/CPR/AED Online Adult First Aid/CPR/AED Online Child and Baby First Aid/CPR/AED Online Advanced Child Care Training Online Safety Training For Swim Coaches Online Lifeguard Management Online View All Online Safety Training Courses First Aid First Aid Certification (Certification & CEUs) First Aid Renewal and Certification First Aid Classes (How We Teach) First Aid Classes Online First Aid Training Performing First Aid Child and Baby First Aid What is First Aid? First Aid Steps First Aid for Severe Trauma (FAST) Until Help Arrives CPR CPR Certification CPR Renewal and Certification Careers That Require CPR Certification CPR Classes CPR Online Classes CPR Training CPR/AED for Professional Rescuers (CPRO) Performing CPR CPR for a Baby or Child CPR for a Pet Hands-Only CPR CPR Steps What is CPR? Train My Employees AED AED Certification AED Certification Renewal AED Classes AED Classes Online AED Training Using an AED What is an AED? BLS/CPR for Healthcare About BLS Training BLS vs. CPR ALS vs. BLS BLS vs. BCLS Performing BLS BLS Steps BLS Handbook What is BLS? BLS Certification BLS Renewal BLS for Healthcare Providers BLS Classes BLS Classes Online Resuscitation Suite ALS/PALS ALS & PALS Training ALS Certification PALS Certification Bridge Training Resuscitation Suite Babysitting & Child Care Babysitting & Child Care Preparation Babysitting Basics Babysitting & Child Care Certification Babysitting Training Babysitting & Child Care Classes Babysitting & Childcare Online Classes Child Care Licensing Skills Sessions Lifeguarding Aquatic Examiner Service Aquatic Representative Lifeguard Preparation Lifeguard Training Lifeguard Certification Lifeguard Classes Lifeguard Test Lifeguard Recertification Lifeguard Manual Water Safety Water Safety Instructor Certification CPRO Swimming + Water Safety Adult Swim Lessons Kid Swim Lessons Swim Lessons Swim Coach Training Learn To Swim Providers Water Safety Outreach Nurse Assistant/CNA Training CNA Classes CNA Practice Test Instructor Training & Bridging How to Become an Instructor Become a Licensed Training Provider International Services Training Get Training Supplies Instructor Bridging Courses Participants Get Class Materials Find My Certificate Continuing Education Credits Scientific Advisory Council Lifesaving Awards Organizations Training for Organizations Train My Employees Become a Licensed Training Provider Scientific Advisory Council Lifesaving Awards Workplace Safety (First Aid/CPR/AED) First Aid for Severe Trauma (FAST) OSHA Alliance Aquatics Aquatic Examiner Service Healthcare Professionals (BLS/ALS/PALS) Resuscitation Suite Procedural Sedation for Adults and Pediatrics Nurse Assistant Training First Responders (Police, Fire, EMS) Education Purchase AED Contact Us Train My Employees Become a Licensed Training Provider Find My Certificate Supplies & Products New First Aid/CPR/AED Materials Rev. 2021 Training Supplies CPR Manikins & Lung Bags Adult Manikins Infant Manikins Manikin Lungs & Shields Brayden/BigRed™ Manikins Prestan Manikins Laerdal Manikins AED Trainers & Pads CPR Masks & Face Shields Instructor Kits Student Training Packs Lifeguarding Equipment Manikins & Lung Bags Adult Manikins Infant Manikins Manikin Lungs & Shields Brayden/BigRed™ Manikins Prestan Manikins Laerdal Manikins Instructor Kits Books & DVDs Lifeguarding & Aquatics Lifeguarding Swimming & Water Safety Caregiving Child Care Training Materials Babysitting Materials CNA/NAT Materials First Aid/CPR/AED CPR AED for Professional Rescuers Materials First Aid/CPR/AED Materials First Aid for Severe Trauma™ (FAST™) Training Resources Wilderness First Aid BLS/ALS/PALS Basic Life Support ALS/PALS Supplies Responding to Emergencies & Emergency Medical Response Emergency Medical Response Responding to Emergencies Clearance Books & DVDs Emergency Preparedness First Aid Supplies First Aid Kits Bleeding Control CPR Keychains Supplies, Refills & Other First Aid Purchase AED My Account Login / Create Account Find My Certificate Learning Center Find a Class Online Only First Aid CPR AED BLS/CPR for Healthcare ALS/PALS Babysitting & Child Care Skills Sessions Lifeguarding Swimming + Water Safety Nurse Assistant/CNA Training Instructor Training & Bridging Use my location Live Chat 0 Your Cart is Empty < Continue Shopping Search Classes Products Articles Select a Class Type Online Only First Aid CPR AED BLS/CPR for Healthcare ALS/PALS Babysitting & Child Care Skills Sessions Lifeguarding Swimming + Water Safety Nurse Assistant/CNA Training Instructor Training & Bridging find classes Use my location Your browser's Javascript functionality is turned off. Please turn it on so that you can experience the full capabilities of this site. Take a Class Cat & Dog First Aid Online Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn EmailClient Take a Class Cat & Dog First Aid Online Cat & Dog First Aid Online Training You love your pets and want to keep them happy – and providing a healthy lifestyle and being prepared to deliver first aid care for your pet is the best way to do that! In this 35-minute online course, you will learn the basics in caring for cats and dogs through a variety of topics – from understanding and checking your pet's vital signs, to preventative care for cats and dogs, to caring for the most critical emergency situations - including breathing and cardiac emergencies, wounds, bleeding, and seizures. Course Benefits Include: Learn how to check your pet's vital signs, how to conduct preventative care for your pets, and how to recognize and provide first aid for the most severe emergencies your pet may experience. Red Cross digital certification provided upon completion - access anytime, anywhere! Desktop and tablet compatibility providing flexibility to access how, when, and where you want to take the course. Log-in anytime to review course material. Content developed by the American Red Cross team of scientific and medical experts. Pet First Aid App Download our award-winning Pet First Aid app to be completely prepared to keep your furry friends safe and healthy! The American Red Cross Pet First Aid app is the perfect on-the-go reference guide for pet owners to have on their smartphones. Be prepared to deliver fast and effective care for cats and dogs, along with several other features! Available on the Apple App Store and Google Play Store. Click Here to Download Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn EmailClient Enter Your Email Please enter a valid email address. For Example, yourname@domain.com You're on the list - thanks Live assist Start Screenshare End support Contact customer service customer service Contact customer service customer service Contact customer service customer service Need Help? Live Chat Local Training & Events Shipping + Returns Find Classes Near You FAQs Course Cancellation Policy Certificates Online Learning Instructor Resources Site Map Privacy Policy Terms of Use © The American Red Cross We're unable to add this class to your cart. Please refresh your results and try again. If you're having trouble signing up, please contact Customer Service 

Close Search About Us Everyday Care Main Menu CareClub Know Your Pet Breed Information Press Center Main Menu Press Center Events Careers Shop Explore Shop Main Menu Explore Shop All Products All Products Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Dogs For Dogs Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Cats For Cats Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets Find Care Welcome to Existing Account Already have a myVCA account? Log in 24/7 to access your pet’s health care information. Log In Now Activate Your Account Looking for a convenient way to access your pet’s health records, refill prescriptions, view upcoming appointments and more? Set up your myVCA account today. Activate Account Find Care myVCA Search Shopping Cart × Search Home Know Your Pet Feeding Times And Frequency For Your Dog Feeding Times and Frequency for Your Dog By Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Robin Downing, DVM, CVPP, CCRP, DAAPM Print Article I've heard conflicting advice about feeding my dog - once a day, twice a day, just keep the bowl filled. I'm confused! What is a good feeding schedule?Feeding your dog does not have to be mysterious. By recognizing a few key concepts and attributes of dogs we can create a very reasonable feeding plan for them. Dogs are creatures of habit. We can use this fact to our advantage by creating a regular feeding schedule and sticking to it. A regular feeding schedule helps with house training puppies, as well as adult rescue dogs who have not been taught household manners. Puppies generally need to relieve themselves within 10 to 15 minutes of eating a meal. By linking a 'potty stop' with a meal we not only allow ourselves to predict when the pup needs a trip outside, we allow the puppy to learn to associate the urges to urinate and defecate with being in the appropriate location. This is a very important step in the house-training process. Feeding an adult dog at regular times provides the security and predictability of a routine. Meals become a cornerstone event of the day around which other activities are added. A feeding routine helps your dog cope when there are changes in the household (e.g., a child moves away to college, a new baby arrives, or a vacation during which a house-sitter is in charge). "A feeding routine helps your dog cope when there are changes in the household." A feeding routine makes a necessary food change easier. When your dog is used to eating at the same times each day, his body becomes conditioned to expect food at those times. Hunger can be a great motivator! If the stage is set for increased hunger followed by meals at regular times, then transitioning to a new food will often be seamless and straightforward. Dogs have a simple stomach anatomy, just like humans. Because dogs have a simple stomach structure, once the stomach is filled with food, it will empty within a few hours as food moves into the small intestine. After 8 to 10 hours, an empty stomach begins to send signals to the brain stimulating a hunger response. For this reason, at least two meals per day are best for your dog. Imagine if you only got to eat breakfast each day, and that was it! Regular, routine feeding times allow your dog's body to be prepared for the food it will receive. It is not recommended to keep the bowl filled and allow grazing. A break in eating habits can be a warning sign of illness. When dogs eat on a regular schedule, that habit becomes strong. It is easy to see at a glance if all the food from a meal is consumed. If food is left, whether all or part of a meal, that is an important signal that something is wrong, and it is time to schedule a veterinary appointment. I was told that puppies should eat all they want; 3 or 4 times per day. Is that true?Feeding a puppy all it can eat at one time is called 'ad libitum' or 'free choice' feeding. This is not recommended as it can create juvenile obesity, binge eaters, as well as set the stage for some orthopedic problems and diabetes. Over-eating at any one meal can also cause stomach discomfort and bloating causing slower digestion. Dogs are acknowledged to have a genetically determined "set point" for their adult size. Slower, controlled growth in puppies optimizes body condition in adulthood. How many meals should my dog eat each day?The number of meals a dog eats per day depends completely on the family schedule. Dogs should eat at least two meals each day, about 12 hours apart. But a breakfast, lunch, and dinner schedule is an equally great option. If more than 12 hours elapses between meals, the stomach can become hyperacidic causing nausea. My dog doesn’t finish her meal all at once. I think she prefers to graze. What should I do?Some dogs really can regulate their food intake fairly well. It is still a good idea to create the expectation of mealtimes. This will help make it easier if another pet is added to your family at some point in the future. For grazers, simply measure out the entire day's portion of food in the morning and offer the bowl several times throughout the day. Choose regular times in order to create the routine we know is helpful. The important thing is to use a measured portion, either with a measuring cup or a kitchen scale, for the day. "The important thing is to use a measured portion for the day." Another consideration is the use of food toys. Many options exist from rolling food toys that just drop out a kibble of food intermittently to stationary food toys that require the dog to work for the food. See the handout “Feeding the Mind and Body: Interactive Feeders for Dogs and Cats” for more information on these types of feeders. Food toys are almost as entertaining for the people in your family as they are for your dog! Your veterinarian remains the best source of nutritional guidance for your dog, answering important questions like what to feed, how much to feed, and how frequently to feed. Feeding time can be an important bonding time. Creating routine and regular feeding times builds fun into everyday activities. Contributors: Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Robin Downing, DVM, CVPP, CCRP, DAAPM Keywords Care & Wellness Nutrition Pet Services Find a Hospital Locate a hospital near you Learn more Related Articles VCA ANIMAL HOSPITALS About Us Contact Us Find a Hospital Location Directory Press Center Social Responsibility Career Opportunities Grow Your Hospital Sitemap Affiliate of Mars Inc. 2023 | © Copyright VCA Animal Hospitals all rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Web Accessibility | AdChoices | Cookie Notice | Cookie Settings | Your Privacy Choices 

Toggle Menu Registrations Shop Young Kennel Club Login Toggle Search Basket items Getting a dog Dog training Dog breeding Health and dog care Events and Activities About us Registrations Shop Young Kennel Club Home Health and dog care Health A to Z of health and care issues Creating healthy feeding habits Creating healthy feeding habits Giving your dog a healthy well-balanced diet can reduce their risk of a wide range of chronic diseases and can help keep their body fit and strong. A well-balanced diet is more than just what you put in their bowl, but also includes the amount you feed them and any additional snacks too. It's easy to give your dog extra food throughout the day, either as treats, table scraps or just giving them a little more at mealtimes, but doing so regularly can be damaging to their health and can make them less happy in the long run. It’s vital that you take care of what food you give to your dog and that you maintain good feeding habits that will allow them to live the healthiest and happiest life possible. Why healthy feeding habits are important Maintaining good feeding habits can help prevent your dog from becoming overweight and can contribute to your dog living a longer and healthier life. Keeping your dog lean and fit can reduce their risks of developing heart disease, diabetes and can reduce the strain on their joints and back. Choose a good quality food The type and amount of food your dog should eat will depend on a number of factors, including their age, size and how active they are. Typically, food that is high in protein and fibre, but low in fat is excellent for helping to keep your dog healthy. These foods provide dogs with adequate energy while also keeping them feeling fuller for longer. Your vet will be able to help you work out a diet that is appropriate for your dog. Don’t “guesstimate” when giving food Some of the most important aspects of having a well-balanced diet include portion control. Many owners “guesstimate” how much food to give to their dog, but this can be very unreliable, especially as we are more likely to be overgenerous and give them too much food rather than too little. You could consider measuring out your dog’s food using a cup or a scoop, but even this method may not be accurate as they can be very easy to overfill. Weigh out your food To help you know how much food your dog is eating and how many calories they are consuming each day, it is important to weigh out their food. Your vet should be able to give you a guideline on how much they should be eating each day, based on their ideal target weight. Good quality dog food will tell you how many calories each serving contains, so you can work out how much food they need to be given to maintain or reduce their weight. Some foods may give this as calories per scoop or per gram. Avoid free feeding Free feeding (leaving food out all day for a dog to graze on) is something you should avoid, especially if you are trying to help your dog lose weight. Dogs that have food constantly available to them are likely to eat more food than those fed fixed amounts at regular times each day. You know your dog best and if you are used to free feeding and your dog is a healthy size then continue doing what is right for you. Try feeding two smaller meals in a day Dogs like routine and having meals at regular times gives them something to look forward to and makes their day more interesting. To help keep your dog in shape, you could consider feeding them two or more smaller meals throughout the day. By feeding them regularly it prevents them from eating too quickly, which improves digestion, stops them swallowing lots of air when they eat and makes them less likely to still feel hungry after they have eaten. Try not to feed them too late When working out what times you should regularly feed your dog, make sure that you don’t feed them too late, as they will not burn many calories when sleeping at night. Late-night feeding can easily lead to weight gain. Give treats sensibly When giving your dog treats watch what you give them and how often. Make sure treats are not high in fat or sugar. Some appropriate snacks include carrot sticks, or a small piece of cucumber, apple or banana When giving treats, make sure you include them in your dog’s total daily calorie intake. Taking the calories your dog eats in treats from the calorie allowance of their meals is a good way to balance things out You could put some of your dog’s kibble allowance aside and use that as treats during the day Think about your dog’s daily calorie intake It’s important that you divide your dog’s total calorie intake for the day between each meal so that you are not overfeeding them. If you like to give them treats, make sure that you assign a certain amount of their calories for these before working out how much to give them for each meal. Avoid giving table scraps Do you, or your family, have a habit of giving your dog food from their plate, or sneaking them food under the table? If so, it will probably make your dog happy, but feeding table scraps and other fatty treats may encourage many pets to overeat and gain excessive weight. If you cannot resist giving table scraps, make sure they are something healthy, e.g. raw carrots or rice cakes. If your dog often begs for food scraps, you could consider feeding them before you cook or eat so they are not hungry. Avoid giving some human foods Some things that humans eat are not always appropriate for dogs. Foods such as grapes, raisins, onions, chocolate and some artificial sweeteners can be poisonous to dogs. Table scraps are also often fatty and high in calories, which will not help your dog lose weight and may upset their stomach. Find out about other foods that are poisonous to dogs. Make eating more fun Toys that slowly release food when they are moved around, or played with, are an excellent way to help your dog draw out meal times so that they do not gobble down their food too quickly. This means they will be more satisfied with less food. These toys, available from most pet shops, are also a great form of mental stimulation that your dogs will love to play with. Discourage your dog from begging Begging for food is something that comes naturally to most dogs and can be something that is incredibly difficult to resist. Although it can be a sign that your dog is hungry, it may not always be the case. If your dog regularly begs for food, you could: Offer them some fresh water - sometimes quenching their thirst may distract them Take them for a walk, as this may help to take their mind off food Give them a healthy snack, such as carrot sticks or slices of apple. Alternatively, you could give them a small amount of kibble, but make sure if you give any treats these are taken into consideration when calculating your dog’s total calorie intake for the day Give them some attention, such as petting them or playing with them Give them small meals throughout the day to keep them feeling full Time your dog’s meal so that you feed them before you prepare your own meal or before you eat Give them plenty of encouragement Although many people think of dogs as eating pretty much anything, in reality some dogs might actually be quite fussy about what they eat from their bowls. If your dog is a “fussy eater” try to encourage them to eat their food and ignore their begging. Give them lots of praise for eating their own food from their bowl. You could also try: Restricting access to sneaky snacks, including human food from your plate Limiting their treats to training tools only Making your dog’s food more appealing Being persistent and consistent with your approach to feeding Switching to another type of food Read more about feeding a fussy eater. Get your whole family involved Dogs can sometimes receive small amounts of treats from a number of family members. If everyone in a large family is giving them a treat it can all add up and be enough to fill them up. In houses where more than one person feeds the dog, it can be more of a challenge to know how much food your dog has had in a day. Where possible, one adult should be responsible for all the feeding, but if this is not realistic, then you may wish to create a set of feeding instructions and records so that each person who feeds the dog notes down on a homemade chart how much they have given, what type of food and when. Alternatively, you could weigh out each of your dog’s meals at the beginning of each day and store them in labelled, sealable containers. This way everyone will know how much the dog has been fed and how much is left for the day. Ensure your dog always has access to water Giving your dog access to plenty of fresh water at all times throughout the day will keep them hydrated, help regulate their body temperature and will aid with digestion. Be active Regular exercise, whether it’s walking or other activities are vitally important to build into your dog’s day. It keeps them fit, builds strong bones, tones up muscles, burns excess energy and helps them maintain a healthy weight. Avoid feeding immediately before or after exercise, and allow an hour to pass between feeding and activity. Speak to your vet If you’re concerned that you’re feeding your dog too much, or not enough then it’s always a good idea to call your local veterinary practice for advice. Similarly, if you’re concerned that your dog’s feeding behaviour has changed or that your dog is displaying signs that you are concerned about then call your vet straight away. Article author Content provided by PRO PLAN, The Kennel Club’s partner in dog nutrition. Think your dog may be affected? If you're worried about your dog's health, always contact your vet immediately! We're not a veterinary organisation and so we can't give veterinary advice, but if you're worried about any of the issues raised in this article, please contact your local vet practice for further information. Find a vet near you If you're looking for a vet practice near you, why not visit the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons' Find a vet page. Back to top TheKennelClubUK on Facebook TheKennelClubUK on Instagram TheKennelClubUK on Twitter TheKennelClubUK on YouTube Media Media Centre Campaigns About us About The Kennel Club Contact us/help centre Job opportunities Our facilities Registration and services The Kennel Club Pet Insurance Petlog Charity work The Kennel Club Charitable Trust The Kennel Club Educational Trust The Kennel Club Arts Foundation Events Crufts Discover Dogs All other events Event Terms & Conditions Policies Child protection policy Safeguarding policy Accessibility Policy Copyright © The Kennel Club Limited 2023. The unauthorised reproduction of text and images is strictly prohibited. Privacy policy Cookie policy Terms & conditions Search The Kennel Club Go 

Menu Menu Royal Canin, Health Nutrition for Cats and Dogs Account Log in Create an account Forgot Password Select Language Search Search Start typing to search Close Scientific Practice Management Issues Vet Symposium Authors About Vet Focus Close Worldwide medical and scientific journal for animal health professionals SCIENTIFIC Back SCIENTIFIC View all scientific articles Dermatology Gastro intestinal tract Health management Urinary Vital support Weight management PRACTICE MANAGEMENT Back PRACTICE MANAGEMENT View all practice management articles ISSUES Back ISSUES All issues Regular issues Special practice management issues Special clinical issues VET SYMPOSIUM Back VET SYMPOSIUM Practice Management 2020 Scientific 2020 Practice Management 2019 Scientific 2019 AUTHORS Back AUTHORS ABOUT VET FOCUS Back ABOUT VET FOCUS Select Language Log in Create an account Download Acrobat Reader Home Scientific Canine feeding behavior Home Scientific Canine feeding behavior Issue number 24.3 Behavior Canine feeding behavior Published 04/03/2021 Written by Jon Bowen Also available in Français , Deutsch , Italiano and Español Two trends appear to have become fashionable amongst dog owners in recent years: Natural feeding: Feeding of diets that are based on the composition of wild wolf diets, often including raw ingredients. Dominance-based training methods: The use of gestures of dominance, such as feeding order or restriction of privileges, to establish control based on increased owner status as a pack leader rather than through reinforcement of desirable behaviors using food rewards. Key points The diet of modern wolves should not be used as an absolute template for the composition of domestic dog diets, but instead their feeding behavior provides an indication of the needs of domestic dogs. Dogs are highly motivated to forage and work to get food, but these needs are rarely met in a domestic setting, which can lead to behavioral problems. The relationship between dogs and people should be established using feeding and training with food rewards rather than traditional methods based on concepts of dominance. Prevention of behavioral problems is closely associated with the use of food rewards during training. Introduction Two trends appear to have become fashionable amongst dog owners in recent years: Natural feeding: Feeding of diets that are based on the composition of wild wolf diets, often including raw ingredients. Dominance-based training methods: The use of gestures of dominance, such as feeding order or restriction of privileges, to establish control based on increased owner status as a pack leader rather than through reinforcement of desirable behaviors using food rewards. Both trends are rooted in a popular return to a naturalistic view of dogs, but share the common weakness that they do not take into account the impact that the presence of humans has had on domestic dogs and wolves. This article will provide an overview of the feeding behavior and preferences of wolves and dogs, and provide an indication of how a better understanding of this subject can lead to fewer health and behavioral problems in domestic dogs. The relationship between people and dogs The history of the relationship between people and dogs is a long one. Homo sapiens is thought to have emerged in Africa approximately 250,000 years ago, after a period of increasing skull expansion in early hominid species which began 150,000 years earlier. Although there is evidence of gradual development of tool use and cultural advancement in our species throughout its history, there appears to have been a surge in cultural development which culminated in “behavioral modernity” approximately 50,000 years ago; namely the presence of symbolic culture, language and specialized technology, which contain all of the elements recognizable in subsequent civilizations, including the keeping of animals (Figure 1). Figure 1. A brief summary of human association with the domestic dog. Figure 1. A brief summary of human association with the domestic dog. The ancestor of the domestic dog is Canis lupus (the grey wolf), which became a species separate from the coyote approximately 1-2 million years ago. The geographic origin of the domestic dog remains controversial. Genetic studies have pointed to an origin in South-East Asia, the Middle East or South-East China 1 2 3, with a possibility of genetic divergence from the wolf beginning up to 100,000 years ago. However, the most recently published analysis of the mitochondrial DNA of prehistoric canids and modern dogs suggests that domestication began 18,800-32,100 years ago 4. The earliest accepted archaeological evidence of canine domestication is the 33,000-year-old remains of a dog found in Siberia in 2010 5, which was subsequently found to be more closely related genetically to the modern domestic dog than the wolf 6. In general, the genetic and archaeological evidence indicates that while there may have been some association between our species early in the history of Homo sapiens, dogs only began to undergo the process of domestication in the era of human behavioral modernity (Figure 2). This is significant, because it means that the dog would have been present prior to, and throughout, the development of agriculture. It would therefore have been part of human communities during the development of the most fundamental aspects of human culture relating to the preparation and consumption of food. From the very beginning of its association with humans, the domestic dog’s diet and feeding habits would have been heavily influenced by the practices and expectations of people. Figure 2. A 7,000-year-old rock painting from Tassili N’Ajjer, Algeria, depicting humans hunting with dogs that show physical traits that differentiate them from wolves and other wild canids. © Shutterstock Figure 2. A 7,000-year-old rock painting from Tassili N’Ajjer, Algeria, depicting humans hunting with dogs that show physical traits that differentiate them from wolves and other wild canids. © Shutterstock The wolf (Canis lupus) Diet The behavior of modern wolves is often referred to as the basis for understanding the behavior of domestic dogs. While there is a lot to be gained from this, the modern wolf is in fact as much the product of the influence of humans as the domestic dog is, and this may be particularly true with respect to diet. The wolf was once one of the most widely distributed mammals, living throughout the northern hemisphere. In the areas where it continues to survive, its dietary range includes other mammals (ranging in size from small mammals to large ungulates), snakes, reptiles, birds and their eggs, fish, primates, carrion, berries, vegetables and fruit. Having such a wide range of potential food sources, wolves have a number of food-competitors, including coyotes, jackals, foxes and bears. Being bigger and better organized group hunters than many of their competitors, wolves are more successful predators of large ungulates, and hence we see a predomination of moose, deer, bison and caribou in the diet of modern wolves. This has given rise to a perception that this is the natural diet of wolves, and that they and domestic dogs are almost pure carnivores. With the development of agriculture, humans began to enclose and cultivate land, keep animals and drive away predators and pests. The expansion of agriculture, human settlements and trading routes would have had a progressively limiting effect on the range of habitats available to wolves, thereby also restricting their diet 7. This change was relatively rapid, within less than 2% of the history of the species (Figure 3). Now confined to a range that is less than half the size it once was, and to areas are generally less supportive of human habitation, the modern wolf is presented with a very different range of foraging opportunities which may not be representative of its past. So although modern wolves predominantly hunt large ungulates, this may be the result of choice restriction and competition with other species. This idea is supported by aspects of the wolf’s anatomy; for example, its dentition is similar to that of that jackal, which is omnivorous 7 8. Figure 3. Modern wolves share a common ancestry with the domestic dog, but their hunting range and behavior may have been significantly altered by the threat from humans. © Shutterstock Figure 3. Modern wolves share a common ancestry with the domestic dog, but their hunting range and behavior may have been significantly altered by the threat from humans. © Shutterstock The current dietary range and dentition of wolves suggest that they may be best classified as facultative carnivores; the bulk of their preferred diet is animal flesh, supplemented with plant material, but they can subsist on an entirely non-animal diet. However, prior to human persecution, their dietary habits may have been more varied and omnivorous. The intrinsic flexibility of this omnivorous nature would have been an advantage during and after domestication, when the dog’s diet would have contained little protein, ultimately leading to the permanent adaptation to a carbohydrate-rich diet which has been observed in genomic studies of the domestic dog 9. Hunting and feeding When hunting large ungulates, wolves operate as a cooperative group with only two or three wolves actually participating in the killing 10. The rest will be involved in a variety of roles including breaking a selected individual away from its herd, running it down, or keeping other members of the herd away whilst it is being hunted. In areas where wolves currently depend on elk as a food source, each wolf typically catches one or two elk per month, depending on season, but they have been observed to survive on scavenged food alone for periods of up to 10 weeks 10. Wolves are therefore adapted to a “feast or famine” foraging pattern, in which there may be long periods without a successful hunt. If a hunt is successful, all members of the group seek to gain a share of the carcass. It is important that the sharing of the carcass does not result in injury to group members, for two reasons. Firstly, the ability of the group to continue hunting depends on the fitness of all of its members. Secondly, the members of wolf groups are often related, so there is a genetic basis for altruism; sharing food with close relatives increases the probability of a proportion of an individual’s own genes being passed to future generations. Feeding order is not only affected by the relative status and role of individuals in the group, but also an individual’s need for food. Juvenile animals are not involved in the process for competing on a hierarchical basis for food. Wolves have therefore evolved systems of communication and competitor evaluation that enable them to deal with very difficult situations of competition between group members that prevent serious injury. Foraging in itself is a highly motivated behavior, independent of the need to obtain food. This has been confirmed by the phenomenon of “contrafreeloading” which has been observed in a wide range of wild and laboratory animal species, including wild canids 11 12. “Contrafreeloading” occurs when an individual chooses to work to gain access to food that is also available for free –it appears that in most species it is preferable to perform an operant response in order to gain food reinforcement, rather than simply to consume the food (Figure 4). Figure 4. Operant response. An operant response involves learning about the outcome associated with different behaviors. The discriminative stimulus (DS) is a sound, object, event or command that signifies to the animal that a change in its behavior could lead to a positive outcome (or avoid a negative outcome). Reinforced behaviors are expressed with greater frequency in the future. “Contrafreeloading”* suggests that the need to perform operant responses to get food reinforcement is more valuable to the animal than the food alone. * “Contrafreeloading” is the term coined to describe the finding that many animals prefer to earn food rather than simply eating identical, but freely accessible, food. Figure 4. Operant response. An operant response involves learning about the outcome associated with different behaviors. The discriminative stimulus (DS) is a sound, object, event or command that signifies to the animal that a change in its behavior could lead to a positive outcome (or avoid a negative outcome). Reinforced behaviors are expressed with greater frequency in the future. “Contrafreeloading”* suggests that the need to perform operant responses to get food reinforcement is more valuable to the animal than the food alone. * “Contrafreeloading” is the term coined to describe the finding that many animals prefer to earn food rather than simply eating identical, but freely accessible, food. Domestication The ability of wolves to subsist on scavenged food and a non-animal diet may have been crucial to their suitability for domestication. It is not clear how this started, but two of the main theories for canine domestication are that either wolf cubs were trapped and reared, or that wolves were partially “self-domesticated” when they were attracted into human settlements by the opportunity to scavenge food. Voluntary phases of domestication may have occurred during periods of reduced prey availability, with a subsequent selective pressure in favor of animals that were bold, sociable and attracted to a diet that was composed of non-animal food. It is suggested that the main trait passed on by successful animals to their offspring was a reduction in flight threshold (the distance at which an avoidance-escape response is triggered), so that successive generations became increasingly tolerant of human proximity. The urge to contrafreeload may have provided the basis for initial interactions with people and the earliest responses to training (Figure 5); the motivation to perform an operant response for reinforcement is at the heart of dog training. Evidence from studies comparing the effectiveness of training methods based on dominance, punishment and positive reinforcement strongly suggest that positive reinforcement with food produces superior outcomes and is less stressful for the dog 13 14. It is likely that food-based training formed the basis for early human-dog interactions, because even rudimentary knowledge of wolf social behavior would have been unavailable to our early ancestors. Figure 5. “Contrafreeloading” is the basis for training, as dogs prefer to work for food even when food is otherwise available for free. © Jon Bowen Figure 5. “Contrafreeloading” is the basis for training, as dogs prefer to work for food even when food is otherwise available for free. © Jon Bowen Even with improving agricultural methods, meat or fish-based dietary protein would have been of high value to people. Trapped wolf cubs, and early domestic dogs, would have been maintained on a diet that contained only a small quantity of lower quality protein, together with scraps of human food that was mostly fat and carbohydrate. However, they would have received food on a more regular basis than wild wolves, reducing the need for competition and establishing a relationship with people based on feeding. The conflict-limiting behavior of wolves is also important for their ability to fit into human communities; domestic dogs would be intolerable as companions or working animals if they were always violently competitive over food. As domestication proceeded, and dogs started to become a part of human communities, new selection pressures would have become important. Sociability, tolerance of handling and an ability to respond to human communication would all have become increasingly important, with those animals which did not show early promise being removed from the breeding population. This selection process favored the retention of juvenile physical and behavioral characteristics into adulthood (neotenisation); for example, floppy ears, heavy loose jowls, increased playfulness, behavioral plasticity, and reduced competitiveness and aggressiveness. In a series of experiments lasting more than 50 years, it has been shown that selective breeding for friendliness in silver foxes leads to heritable changes in sociability and dependence on people, together with changes in coat color and markings that are similar to those thought to have occurred during the domestication of the dog 15 16. Selective breeding for traits that made dogs sociable and workable has had far reaching effects on their ability to relate to humans. For example, domestic dogs and human children exhibit comparable abilities to attend to and process information from human facial expressions 17. This ability is not observed in wolves when they are reared in the same manner as domestic pets. Further artificial selection has seen the enhancement of breed-specific behavior, with dogs being more specialized in certain parts of the hunting behavioral sequence, e.g., dogs that favor pointing or herding behavior. Some of these behaviors have become so enhanced that they would have a negative impact on survival and fitness if present in a wild animal. Evidence for this distortion in hunting behavior comes from studies of feral dogs, which appear incapable of co-operative hunting in the manner of wolves, and instead depend on scavenging 18. Therefore, in terms of diet and feeding behavior, the end result of a host of natural and artificial selection pressures was that domestic dogs were able to thrive on a diet that was less meat-based, be less fussy about the kind of food they would eat, accept a shift from “feast and famine” to regularly fed meals, and be less competitive over food. They traded the ability to hunt effectively as a group for being able to read and respond to emotional and communicative signals in people, and thereby develop a relationship with people that was based on feeding and reinforcement. Satiety and food preference In herbivorous and omnivorous species diet selection has been linked to mechanisms for establishing an optimal macronutrient balance. It was thought that these mechanisms were unnecessary in carnivores, as their diet was assumed to be innately balanced and invariant 19. However, the diversity of the wolf diet implies that some mechanisms for food selection do exist in this species. A recent study has shown that domestic dogs select a diet that favors an overall balance of 30% protein, 63% fat and 7% carbohydrate (with respect to metabolizable energy) 19. This is very different from the diet selected by domestic cats, which is more heavily biased toward protein (52% protein, 36% fat, 12% carbohydrate) 20, which relates to the obligate carnivorous nature of the domestic cat and the relatively higher protein:fat ratio in the small mammals (e.g., mice) that form the basis of its natural diet. In a number of studies, dogs have shown a tendency to consume food in excess of their energy requirements. When fed ad libitum and given a choice of dietary components, dogs did regulate their protein and overall energy intake, but the regulated energy level was around twice the mean daily requirement 19. This implies that dogs have inherited satiety mechanisms that are the result of adaptation to a “feast or famine” food availability in wolves. Wolves have been observed to consume as much as 10 kg of meat during the initial feeding bout after killing a large ungulate 10. It is also suggested that rapid eating may have been favored during domestication, when competition for food would have been high 7 but intraspecific and interspecific violence would not have been tolerated by humans. This has implications for weight control in dogs. Satiety is the result of a combination of hormonal and physical signals from the gastrointestinal tract that indicate that sufficient food has been consumed. In many mammals, including man, a range of hormones including ghrelin, cholecystokinin, peptide YY (PYY), oxyntomodulin, and adipokines play a role in satiation. Evidence from trials of the weight-controlling drug dirlotapide, which is thought to act through PYY, indicates that manipulation of the satiety mechanism in the dog can be effective in the treatment of obesity 21. However, it is clear that in many situations wolves continue to feed until gastric distension limits further intake. It appears that the same is true, at least in part, with dogs. High fiber levels in the diet, which lead to increased stomach distension, have been shown to increase satiety and decrease voluntary intake in the short and medium term after a meal, with an even greater effect when the diet was both high in protein and fiber 22. Such a diet has been shown to have a beneficial role in weight loss in dogs 23. Implications for domestic dogs as pets Problem prevention Proper socialization and habituation during the sensitive period (3-12 weeks of age) are generally regarded as the key to healthy behavioral development. However, knowledge of the “contrafreeloading” nature of dogs and the retention of juvenile behavior in the domestic dog indicates that the use of food rewards, and feeding in general, to train and develop a bond with puppies is the method most likely to be effective. From the known ethology of wolves and dogs, dominance-based methods will be meaningless, or even intimidating, to puppies. This is supported by evidence for a reduced rate of aggression in dogs trained using positive reinforcement with food, and an increased attentiveness toward owners who employed positive reinforcement 24 Casey RA, Loftus B, Bolster C, et al. Human directed aggression in domestic dogs (Canis familiaris): Occurrence in different contexts and risk factors. App Animal Behavior Sci 2014;152:52-63. . Training has also been shown to have generally beneficial effects such as an increase in problem-solving ability in dogs 25 Marshall-Pescini S, Valsecchi P, Petak I, et al. Does training make you smarter? The effects of training on dogs’ performance (Canis familiaris) in a problem solving task. Behavioural Proc 2008;78:449-454. ; an ability to solve problems reduces frustration and an individual’s need to act instinctively when faced with challenge or conflict. The commonest owner-directed aggression problems in dogs involve resource guarding, and many owners will be shocked when they first encounter food guarding in their young dogs. Knowledge of the competitive behavior of wolves around food, and their use of signaling to avoid fights, shows us that to some degree food guarding is normal in this species. As a result dogs should generally not be challenged over food but should be left to eat in peace. This goes against the traditional view that an owner should repeatedly challenge a dog over its food until it is willing to relinquish the food bowl. The reason is that the traditional method teaches the dog that the owner is a potential competitor, in the manner of another member of a wolf pack. It may learn to relinquish food that is of modest palatability and which is freely available, but the fact that the owner is now regarded as a competitor means that the dog may guard far more ferociously scavenged or stolen food that has not been gifted by the owner, and which is high in fat or protein. This food is not only more palatable but also important for the dog’s diet selection in favor of fat and protein. It is better to establish an association between the presence of the owner and the availability of high value food; for example, by adding small amounts of highly palatable items to the bowl while a puppy is feeding (the food offered should not exceed 10% of the daily calorie requirements). Problems with eating Such problems can include gluttony, scavenging, begging and pickiness. We should expect dogs to be gluttonous, and we can also use an understanding of their normal feeding behavior to explain problems such as pickiness. Feeding behavior often involves the rapid consumption of large amounts of food at one meal, with the main limitation being gastric distension. Scavenging is driven by a need to find supplementary sources of food in anticipation of famine periods, and begging and stealing are an extension of “contrafreeloading”. Once a dog has learned that by climbing onto a kitchen worktop it can steal and eat an entire roast dinner, it is very unlikely that this behavior can be extinguished. This general tendency toward food overconsumption by most dogs means that owners are forced to control their dog’s food intake, and to accept and take responsibility for preventing food stealing and begging. Picky eating is influenced by the same underlying mechanisms. Often, when the diet of picky eating puppies is analyzed, the animals are in fact getting more than sufficient calories, but mostly through begging for human food that is often high in fat. They refuse to eat from a bowl. This problem can therefore be viewed in terms of normal diet selection in dogs, and the effect of “contrafreeloading”; these dogs may be motivated to perform operant behaviors such as begging in order to get food. For picky eaters, scavengers and food thieves, a very successful solution is therefore to provide all food through puzzle or activity feeders and training, which enhances the “contrafreeloading” and foraging aspects of feeding behavior (Figure 6). Having a range of different feeders increases the complexity and diversity of problem solving and foraging behavior available to dogs, which is more important to them than the palatability and range of food flavors. Figure 6. Activity feeding provides an outlet for normal foraging behavior. © Jon Bowen Figure 6. Activity feeding provides an outlet for normal foraging behavior. © Jon Bowen Conclusions The trend toward “natural feeding” has focused on the composition of the diet, and has increased owner awareness regarding the quality of the ingredients in their pet’s food. However, the composition of the recommended diets is often based on dietary patterns observed in modern day wolves. For all the reasons discussed previously, these diets may not be representative of what the wolf ancestors of domestic dogs ate before humans restricted their range, and they do not take into account changes that have occurred in food selection and nutritional requirements during domestication of dogs. This approach to natural feeding also overlooks aspects of feeding that may be much more important to the dog’s psychological wellbeing and the way in which they relate to us. Despite the fact that we see the same foraging behaviors in dogs as we do in wolves, most dogs are expected to take all their food from a bowl and are generally unable to forage. Many are trained using methods that exclude the use of food treats, which not only frustrates a dog’s natural drive to obtain food reinforcement through operant behaviors, but also removes one of the key aspects of the development of a trusting and non-competitive relationship between dog and owner. The subsequent obedience and behavioral problems that owners experience often lead them to use dominance and punishment-based methods that further conflict with the motivations of dogs. It is therefore important that we, as veterinarians, begin to overturn common misunderstandings of the central role that feeding had during the process of domestication, and continues to have in the forging of a relationship between a dog and its owner. References Savolainen P, Zhang Y, Luo J, et al. Genetic evidence for an East Asian origin of domestic dogs. Science 2002;298(5598):1610-1613. von Holdt B, Pollinger JP, Lohmueller KE, et al. Genome-wide SNP and haplotype analyses reveal a rich history underlying dog domestication. Nature 2010;464(7290):898-902. Ding ZL, Oskarsson M, Ardalan A, et al. Origins of domestic dog in Southern East Asia is supported by analysis of Y-chromosome DNA. Heredity 2011;108(5):507-514. Thalmann O, Shapiro B, Cui P, et al. Complete mitochondrial genomes of ancient canids suggest a European origin of domestic dogs. Science 2013;342:871-874. Ovodov ND, Crockford SJ, Kuzmin YV, et al. A 33,000 year-old incipient dog from the Altai Mountains of Siberia: Evidence of the earliest domestication disrupted by the last glacial maximum. PLOS ONE 2011. Druzhkova AS, Thalmann O, Trifonov VA. Ancient DNA analysis affirms the canid from Altai as a primitive dog. PLOS ONE 2013. Bradshaw JWS. The evolutionary basis for the feeding behavior of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus). J Nutr 2006;136(7); 1927-1931. Goldenberg M, Goldenberg F, Funk SM, et al. (2010) Diet composition of black-backed jackals, Canis mesomelas, in the Namib Desert. Folia Zool 2010;59(2):93-101. Axelsson E, Ratnakumar A, et al. The genomic signature of dog domestication reveals adaptation to a starch-rich diet. Nature 2013;495:360-364. Stahler DR, Smith DW, Guernsey DS. Foraging and feeding ecology of the gray wolf (Canis lupus): Lessons from Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, USA. J Nutr 2006;136(7);1923-1926. Osborne SR. The free food (contrafreeloading) phenomenon: A review and analysis. Animal Learning & Behavior 1977;5(3):221-235. da Silva Vasconcellos A, Adania CH, Ades C. Contrafreeloading in maned wolves: Implications for their management and welfare. App Animal Behavior Sci 2012;140:85-91. Hiby, EF, Rooney NJ, Bradshaw JWS. Dog training methods: their use, effectiveness and interaction with behavior and welfare. Anim Welfare 2004;13:63-69. Deldalle S, Gaunet F. Effects of two training methods on stress-related behaviors of the dog (Canis familiaris) and on the dog-owner relationship. J Vet Behavior 2014;1e8. Lindberg J, Björnerfeldt S, Saetre P, et al. Selection for tameness has changed brain gene expression in silver foxes. Curr Biol 2005;15(22): 915-916. Kukekova AV, Trut LN, Chase K, et al. Measurement of segregating behaviors in experimental Silver Fox pedigrees. Behavior Gen 2007;38(2):185-194. Racca A, Guo K, Meints K, et al. Reading faces: differential lateral gaze bias in processing canine and human facial expressions in dogs and 4-year-old children. PLOS ONE 2012;7(4). Macdonald DW, Carr GM. Variation in dog society: between resource dispersion and social flux. In: Serpell J, (ed). The domestic dog: its evolution, behavior and interactions with people. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press;1995;199-216. Hewson-Hughes AK, Hewson-Hughes VL, Colyer A, et al. Geometric analysis of macronutrient selection in breeds of the domestic dog, Canis lupus familiaris. Behavioral Eco 2012;168:293-304. Hewson-Hughes AK, Hewson-Hughes VL, Miller AT, et al. Geometric analysis of macronutrient selection in the adult domestic cat, Felis catus. J Exp Biol 2011;214:1039-1051. Wren JA, Ramudo AA, Campbell SL, et al. Efficacy and safety of dirlotapide in the management of obese dogs evaluated in two placebo-controlled, masked clinical studies in North America. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2007;30(1):81-89. Weber M, Bissot T, Servet E, et al. A high-protein, high-fiber diet designed for weight loss improves satiety in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2007;21(6): 1203-1208. German AJ, Holden SL, Bissot T, et al. A high-protein high-fiber diet improves weight loss in obese dogs. Vet J 2010;183:294-297. Casey RA, Loftus B, Bolster C, et al. Human directed aggression in domestic dogs (Canis familiaris): Occurrence in different contexts and risk factors. App Animal Behavior Sci 2014;152:52-63. Marshall-Pescini S, Valsecchi P, Petak I, et al. Does training make you smarter? The effects of training on dogs’ performance (Canis familiaris) in a problem solving task. Behavioural Proc 2008;78:449-454. Facebook Twitter Linkedin Jon Bowen Jon Bowen Dr. Bowen graduated from the Royal Veterinary College in 1992 and spent several years in first opinion small animal practice. Read more Other articles in this issue Issue number 24.3 Published 25/03/2021 Cats and dietary fiber Nutritionists and veterinarians have been interested in dietary fiber as a component of pet foods or as a supplement for many years. By Allison Wara and Craig Datz Read article Issue number 24.3 Published 10/03/2021 Pets and pet foods – questions and answers Veterinarians and practice support staff encounter questions and comments on a daily basis from clients regarding various aspects of petfoods, many of which are based on hearsay, popular belief and even falsehoods. By Cailin Heinze Read article Issue number 24.3 Published 10/03/2021 Calculating the energy content of pet food Why is it important to know the energy content of pet foods? By Richard Butterwick Read article Issue number 24.3 Published 10/03/2021 The psychology of managing the owner A person will often adopt a domestic animal as a response to a psychological need, such as the desire for a companion, but more often than not a future owner will focus on acquiring an animal that best meets their own needs without always considering the animal’s requirements. By Franco Favaro and Serena Adamelli Read article Log in Create an account Contact Select Language Back to top SCIENTIFIC All scientific articles Dermatology Gastro intestinal tract Health Management Urinary Vital support Weight Management PRACTICE MANAGEMENT All practice management articles ISSUES All issues Regular issues Special practice management issues Special clinical issues AUTHORS VET SYMPOSIUM Practice Management 2020 Scientific 2020 Practice Management 2019 Scientific 2019 ABOUT VET FOCUS Log inCreate an accountContact Select Language Back to top Close This PDF is exclusive to Vet Focus Members Signup to get access Create account Already registered? Log in Close Select Language Language Français Deutsch Italiano Polski Português Română Español English ภาษาไทย 한국어 Українська Русский Submit Cookie Settings 

Skip to Content Home Products All Products Browse by Type Dry Food Wet Food / Toppers Treats Health Enhancers Frozen Browse by Breed Size Small Medium Large Browse by Age Puppy Adult Senior Find the Best Bil-Jac For You Small & Medium Dog Biscuits Large Dog Biscuits Where To Buy Bil-Jac Frozen Why Bil-Jac Our Story Perfectly Prepared™ Nutrition Partnership with America’s VetDogs® For Pet Parents The Dog Blog The Puppy Hub Join the Best Friends Club Join the Puppy Club Breed Library Training Videos Two Bowl Dog Food Challenge Bil-Jac Believer Contact Us Search Icon Why Bil-Jac Our Story Perfectly Prepared™ Nutrition Partnership with America’s VetDogs® For Pet Parents The Dog Blog The Puppy Hub Join the Best Friends Club Join the Puppy Club Breed Library Training Videos Two Bowl Dog Food Challenge Bil-Jac Believer Contact Us Search Icon The Dog Blog Categories: Bil-Jac History Bil-Jac News Breeds Grooming and Care Health and Nutrition Lifestyle Pet Safety Quiz Seasonal Tips Training and Behavior Wellbeing Tips All Posts 3/29/2023 Dog Eating Habits: What Type of Eater is Your Dog? Certain dogs approach mealtime a bit differently than others. While some furry friends are happy to follow a standard feeding schedule, others may exhibit other eating habits. Here are a variety of common eating traits in dogs (and what you can do to accommodate your furry friend’s needs). The “I Got This” Eaters Ideally, your canine companion will be more than happy to follow a regular eating schedule. A good feeding regimen could mean either two or three times per day depending on the age of your dog. Either way, a good eater is patient when being fed and will happily eat her share, so you don’t have to worry too much about her eating habits. Feeding tips for dogs without any eating quirks If your dog is in great health and eating regularly, there’s not too much you need to do. As long as you feed her a high-quality dog food based on her size and age, your furry friend should continue to happily eat according to her regular schedule. Use the feeding guidelines on the food package to start. Measure according to the weight of your dog, and adjust the amount of food up or down based on activity level and if your dog is holding weight, gaining weight or losing weight. The “Panda” Eaters While some dogs are perfectly fine with portion control, other tend to chow down a bit too much. As you’d expect, overeaters simply tend to overeat, which can cause your furry friend to become overweight if you’re not careful. There are a couple of different ways to spot if your dog is an overeater. One sign is that she may devour an entire serving in a short period of time and beg for more. The same goes for treats, as well. It can be tricky to say no to that adorable face, but it’s important to limit your furry friend to what she needs instead of giving her as much food as she wants. It’s also good to avoid free feeding if your dog is an overeater. While some canines display better portion control, a big bowl of food sitting around is just an opportunity to overeat. Feeding tips for dogs who overeat If your dog is displaying signs of being overweight, you may want to consider feeding her a reduced fat formula until she returns to a healthier weight. Of course, you still want to provide her with a food that she’ll enjoy. For example, Bil-Jac Reduced Fat Recipe has 30 percent less fat than our Adult Select Formula, but still has delicious real chicken for great taste while helping you manage your dog’s weight. The “Mealtime is Not Fun Time” Eaters Unlike overeaters, picky dogs may not want anything to do with what’s in their bowl. Whether it’s because they’re particular or they’ve been spoiled by treats or other snacks, these particular pooches will ignore some or all of their food if it’s not up to their standards. Regularly passing on portions of a meal is a problem, as it’s important for your pooch to clean her plate and ensure a balanced diet. Feeding tips for picky dogs When your furry friend is being fussy about her food, it’s important to find something that she can’t turn down. One solution is to give her something delicious, such as Bil-Jac Picky No More Dry Food, made with real chicken liver. Once you find a food that entices your picky eater, make sure she focuses on those tasty meals and avoid giving her any human food or too many other treats. The “Tactful Timers” While some dogs are picky, other dogs refrain from eating because of some form of sensitivity. This could be because your dog has an issue with some of the ingredients in her dog food, such as a sensitivity to certain ingredients or how the food is made. Your dog may also experience discomfort when eating because of a dental issue or some other problem. In either case, you’ll want to address your dog’s sensitivity and provide her with a food that’s right for her. Feeding tips for hesitant or sensitive dogs If your dog has a sensitivity to ingredients or how the food is made, it’s time to try a solution designed for their dietary needs. A food like our Sensitive Solutions Recipe is made with a gentle fiber blend and slow-cooked with chicken and whitefish to be easy on delicate stomachs to help you dog enjoy eating once again. As for dental issues, you’ll want to start by checking with a vet to see if the issue is preventable of fixable. In the meantime, aim for a soft, easy-to-chew dry food like Bil-Jac Dry or a Bil-Jac Wet Dog Food to make mealtime an easier process for your best friend. The “Jumping for Joy” Eaters It’s not uncommon for dogs to get excited around mealtime – tasty food is worth cheering – but some canine companions can take this celebration a bit far. Signs of excitable behavior can include zooming around, barking, jumping, and even knocking the food bowl over in a rush of adrenaline. Feeding tips for excitable dogs Some excited behaviors aren’t necessarily bad, so you’ll have to determine your own tolerance level for various habits. If you want to try and train your dog to calm down during mealtime, you’ll need to try and refocus her excitement. Feeding your dog after boisterous behavior will only reward her for that behavior, so try to get her to sit and stay in place first before you fill her bowl. If she starts to get up or bark, stop and tell her “no” before getting her to sit and stay again (don’t be afraid to use a treat to get her attention). It may take a few tries but repeating this practice over several days will help associate that calm behavior with food. The “Back-off-My-Bowl” Eaters Mealtime is a happy occasion, but some furry friends can get a bit defensive when it comes to their food. Certain canine companions may display signs of resource guarding, which is behavior that’s intended to drive other dogs, or even humans, away from something. In this case, that may mean growling, nipping, or other means to prevent others from taking their kibble. Feeding tips for protective eaters In some cases, food guarding doesn’t need to be retrained – simply giving your dog some space during meals will suffice. If defensive behaviors are starting to impact others in the house, you may need to take some measures to limit preventive behaviors. According to the ASPCA, that means going through a multi-stage process where you acclimate your dog toward your presence during meals while rewarding her with treats. Over time, this process will help your dog associate your presence near her food to positive experiences. Tasty, Nutritious Dog Food for all Eating Habits No matter what type of eater your dog is, your furry friend deserves the best. Want to learn more about what you can do to keep your dog happy and healthy? Join our Best Friends Club today to receive our exclusive email newsletter full of articles on training tips, healthy habits, and members-only discounts on Bil-Jac Dog Food, Treats, and other products. Join the Best Friends Club Related Blog Posts Health and Nutrition Choosing the Best Dry Dog Food for Picky Eaters Health and Nutrition, Lifestyle My Dog Isn't Eating, Should I Be Worried? Health and Nutrition Do Dogs Need Meat? The Importance of Animal Protein for Dogs Health and Nutrition, Lifestyle What to do When Your Dog Eats Something They Shouldn’t Reduced Fat Formula 30% less fat than Bil-Jac Adult Select. Sensitive Solutions Digestive & Immune Support Advanced nutrition for sensitive dogs. Sensitive Solutions Skin & Stomach Support Features the SmartDefense™ System, with vitamins C & E. Picky No More™ Small Breed Created to please even the pickiest of small breed dogs. Picky No More™ Medium & Large Breed Created to please even the pickiest of medium & large breed dogs. Little-Jacs® Small size is perfect for treating any time. Original Recipe Dog Treats The perfect everyday treat. Best Friends Club Sign up to receive the latest news! Back to The Dog Blog Connect with us! #BILJACBELIEVER Breed Library Bil-Jac Frozen Careers Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Coupon Policy Contact Us © 2023 Bil-Jac. All rights reserved. × Search Search 

STUDY MATERIALEXAMSPRODUCTSABOUT USFree Sign UpEnvironmental Studies Text Cum Work Book>Varieties of Food>Exercise 7>Q 1EASY3rd Karnataka BoardIMPORTANTEarn 100Write down the food habit of Dog. SolutionHintSolve with usStep 1The animals which eat both plants and animals and their products are called omnivorous animals. Dogs love to eat meat, fish, vegetables, chicken, rice, etc., It is a pet animal which can be tamed easily at home. Puppies drink their mother's milk. Reveal StepCheckFree Sign UpAsk a DoubtGet Free AppLearn and Prepare for any exam you want !NCERT BooksNCERT Class 12 BooksNCERT Class 11 BooksNCERT Class 10 BooksNCERT Class 9 BooksNCERT Class 8 BooksNCERT Class 7 BooksNCERT Class 6 BooksNCERT SolutionsNCERT Solutions for Class 12NCERT Solutions for Class 11NCERT Solutions for Class 10NCERT Solutions for Class 9NCERT Solutions for Class 8NCERT Solutions for Class 7NCERT Solutions for Class 6School BoardsCBSE Class 6CBSE Class 7CBSE Class 8CBSE Class 9CBSE Class 10CBSE Class 11CBSE Class 12Tamil Nadu Board Class 10Karnataka Board Class 10ICSE Class 9Entrance ExamsNEETJEE MainMHT CETJEE AdvancedAP EAMCETTS EAMCETKCETKVPYBITSATCLATVITEEEKEAMAP EAPCETNATAGUJCETSRMJEEEGCETCOMEDK UGETCUSAT CATASSAM CEEHelpNoticesPrivacy PolicyContact UsTerms & ConditionsJoin UsInvestor RelationsTakeDown Policy© Copyright 2023, Embibe. All rights reserved 

Search Contact Chat Live Contact Us 1-800-889-8967 Track Order - Returns - Shipping Info My Account Sign In New Customer? Start here My Orders Check Order Auto Reship My Orders My Profile My Pets My Favorites My Rewards Auto Reship Sign Out Cart Total: items $299.99 Review Cart dogs cats shop by brands Sales Sale Specials other pets pharmacy My Account Auto Reship Dog Cats Other Pets Shop by Brand Top Sellers Cart Total: items $299.99 Review Cart Search Contact Chat Live Contact Us 1-800-889-8967 Track Order - Returns - Shipping Info My Account Sign In New Customer? Start here My Orders Check Order Auto Reship cart Cart Total: items $299.99 Review Cart Dogs Flea & Tick Protection Topicals Oral Treatments Collars Shampoos & Dips Joint Supplements Hip & Joint Maintenance Extra Strength Joint Support Senior Joint Supplements Joint Max Triple Strength Dental Products Toothbrushes & Toothpastes Dental Treats Dental Water Additives Ora-Clens Oral Hygiene Chews Health & Wellness Allergy Aids Pain Medications Ear & Eye Care Dewormers Vaccines First Aid Remedies Behavioral & Training Calming Aids Housetraining Training Aid Feeding Supplies Automatic Feeders & Waters Slow Feeding Bowls Dog Treats & Chews All-Natural Treats & Biscuits Bones & Rawhide Dental Treat Training Treats Lil Bitz Training Treat Dog Toys Balls & Fetch Toys Chew Toys Interactive Dog Toys Plush & Stuffing Free Dog Food Dry Dog Food Wet Dog Food Veterinary Diets Pet Beds Pillow, & Lounger Beds Crates, Carriers & Kennels Pet Cot Beds Dog Supplies Collars, Leashes & Harnesses Stain & Odor Removal Dog Apparel Pet Tech & Gadgets Cats Flea & Ticks Topicals Oral Treatments Collars Spray, Wipes & Powders Joint Supplements Hip & Joint Maintenance Extra Strength Joint Support Senior Joint Supplements Joint Max for Cats Lysine Products Felisyl Immune System Support Enisyl-F Lysine Supplement Health & Wellness Allergy Aids Skin & Coat Hairball Relief Ear & Eye Cleansers Behavioral & Training Feliway Diffusers and Sprays Pet Organics Anxiety & Stress Sentry Calming Solutions Cat Scratchers Feeding Supplies Automatic Feeders & Waters Stainless Steel Bowls Cat Treats & Chews Dental Cat Treats Natural Cat Treats Meaty Cat Treats Freeze Dried Cat Treats Lil Bitz Training Treats for Cats Cat Toys Interactive Cat Toys Teaser Cat Toys Cat Balls Catnip Toys Cat Food Dry Cat Food Wet Cat Food Cat Beds Pillow & Lounger Beds Cat Trees & Condos Catnip Scratching Boards Cat Supplies Collars, Leashes & Harnesses Crates & Cages Pet Grooming Supplies Shampoos & Conditioners Litter & Litter Boxes Shop by Brands Top Sellers Top Sellers for Dogs (See All) Joint Max TS Soft Chews CET Toothpaste 2.5 oz Bonies All Natural Treats Ora-Clens Oral Hygiene Chews Seresto Flea & Tick Collar Azodyl Capsules Fortiflora Canine Supplement Zymox Otic Enzymatic Solution Greenies Pill Pockets Chondro Flex Top Dog Brands (See All) Bayer Nutramax Vetriscience Vetoquinol Merial Pet Health Solutions Simply Wild Dog Food Missing Link Ceva Animal Health Green Pet Organics Virbac Top Sellers for Cat (See All) Feliway Diffuser AminAvast Kidney Support Spot Wide Colorful Springs Toy Seresto Flea & Tick Collar Enisyl-F Lysine Supplement Fortiflora Feline Probiotics Tapeworm Dewormer Laxacat Advantage II for Cats CET Toothpaste Top Cat Brands (See All) Felisyl Immune Support Advantage II Cosequin for Cats Ceva Catego Frontline for Cats Pill Pockets Joint Max KONG for Cats Pure Bites for Cats Sales Buy 2 get 1 Free Joint Max 20% Discount New Arrivals Sales Buy 2 Get 1 Free Joint Max 20% Off New Arrivals Other Pets Dog Top Dog Categories Joint Supplements Flea & Tick Supplies Dog Treats & Chews Dog Toys Dog Food Skin & Coat Kidney, Liver & Renal Health Pillow, Bolsters & Lounger Beds Collars, Leashes & Harnesses Dog Training Supplies View All Top Dog Brands CET Chews Cosequin K9 Advantix II Azodyl Glyco Flex III Joint Max Triple Strength Fortiflora Bonies Treats PHS Simply Wild Dog Food See More Cat Top Cat Categories Joint Supplements Flea & Tick Supplies Dog Treats & Chews Dog Toys Dog Food Skin & Coat Kidney, Liver & Renal Health Pillow, Bolsters & Lounger Beds Collars, Leashes & Harnesses Dog Training Supplies View All Top Cat Brands Feliway Azodyl Fortiflora Cosequin for Cats Zymox Otic Advantage II Enisyl F CET Toothpaste Laxacat See More Horse Top Horse Categories Dewormers Wound Care Pain & Soreness Relievers Hoof Care Stress Relief Eye Care Grooming Treats Weight Management Digestives Accessories VIEW ALL Top Horse Brands UlcerGard Recovery Horse Joint Care Absorbine Cosequin Joint MAX GLC & Actistatin EquiThrive LubriSyn Panacur Kenetic VIEW ALL Bird Top Bird Categories Toys & Accessories Cages & Coops Wild Bird Feeders Feeding Supplies Foods & Treats Nutritional Supplements VIEW ALL Top Bird Brands Tropimix Living World Hagen Lafeber VIEW ALL Fish Top Fish Categories Aquariums & Bowls Air Pumps Decorations & Ornaments Filter Cartridges Filters & Powerheads Heaters & Thermometers Lighting Maintenance & Supplies Fish Food Fish Medications & Vitamins Water Treatment & Additivies VIEW ALL Top Fish Brands Thomas Labs Marina Tetra Hagen Laguna AquaClear Fluval Aqueon Hikari Dr Tim's Aquatics VIEW ALL Small Pets Top Small Pet Categories Water Bottles Pet Beddings Feeding Accessories Habitats & Accessories Pet Toys Transport Accessories Food & Treats Health & Supplements Dental Care VIEW ALL Top Small Pet Brands Habitrail Kaytee Hagen Super Pet Living World Lixit Nupro VIEW ALL Reptile Top Reptile Categories Heating Lighting Substrates & Bedding Temperature & Humidity Terrariums & Habitats Filtration Decor Accessories Reptile Food Reptile Care VIEW ALL Top Reptile Brands Exo Terra Zoo Med TerraFauna Rep-Cal BioBubble VIEW ALL My Account Auto Reship Home > Pagespages > Properly Managing Your Dog's Eating HabitsProperly Managing Your Dog's Eating HabitsProperly Managing Your Dog's Eating HabitsIn order to properly manage your dog's eating habits, you must be knowledgeable in what constitutes a good diet for your pet. Like people, dogs require a nutritious diet in order to develop strong minds and bodies. The more you learn about the dietary needs of your animal, the better informed choices you can make in his dietary care.Choosing Quality Dog FoodOne of the best ways to choose healthy and nutritious dog food is to inspect the ingredients on the label of the food you want to buy. Dog food nutrition is not dependent on the price or popularity of the brand, but rather on the nutrients contained within.Your pet will benefit from food that is well balanced in nutritional value, containing the appropriate vitamins, minerals and proteins his body needs.Dog food manufacturers categorize their products into life stages to further assist you in choosing the appropriate food for your pet. These life stages are as follows:growth (for puppies)adult maintenance (for grown dogs)gestation/lactation (for pregnant and/or nursing female dogssenior (for elderly animals)and all life (appropriate for all dogs throughout their lives)Other factors that come into play when choosing food for your dog are his personal taste preferences, his lifestyle, health problems and personal environment. Some dogs enjoy the crunchy feel of dry dog food on their teeth, while others prefer the moist, easy to chew kind. Some dog foods are also easier to digest than others. By experimenting with different brands, you can determine which ones your pet enjoys most as well as which foods enhance his health. As a dog owner, it is up to you to discover what diet best suits your pet so that he can grow healthy and strong and enjoy life to the fullest.Developing Healthy Eating HabitsAnother important aspect of managing your pet's diet is frequency of feeding. Many pet owners overfeed their animals, resulting in their pets becoming lazy and fat. Most dog food packages give guidelines on how much food and how often to feed your pet. However, you should also use your discretion in the matter. Both an overweight and underweight condition in a dog will have unhealthy consequences. By helping your pet maintain an adequate weight level, he will live a longer and happier life.Your dog's feeding habits can also be regulated by his life stage. Puppies, for example, require more calories than adult dogs, due to their active nature. An energetic and active puppy will burn more calories faster than his adult counterpart. Once a puppy has been weaned, he can be fed thrice daily until he reaches the age of four to six months. Then you can cut back on his feedings to two a day. Adult dogs generally eat one or two meals per day. Sometimes feeding your dog twice per day is easier on his digestion. The older a dog gets, the less active he becomes. Therefore, you should watch the amount of calories your older pet consumes to avoid problems with obesity. Contact Ussales@entirelypets.comTel: 800-889-8967About Us Track OrderMy AccountLog-inTrack Order Reward Program SalesSale SpecialsBuy 2 Get 1 FreeJoint Max SaleCustomer CareHelp CenterGives Back to Charity✈ Shipping & Return PolicyPromotion Exclusions 

Toggle navigation 641-236-6869 641-236-6869 Home AboutMission Statement Meet the Team New PatientsOnline Forms Payment Options Services Testimonials Virtual Office Tour Contact Feeding Your PetA healthy and balanced diet is essential for a healthy and happy pet. Not only will it provide your pet with enough energy for his day to day activities, but it is also vital for proper brain function. An adequate diet is also particularly important for animals in the early stages of their development.One of the most important things to remember when it comes to feeding your pet is to feed them by ‘life-stage’. Different animals, and in particular cats and dogs, require different nutrition at different stages of their life. For example, puppies around 12 weeks of age will require around 3 meals a day and it is not until they reach around 6 months of age that this amount should be reduced. That said, your animal may prefer smaller and more frequent meals. They key to feeding your pet properly is understanding what works best for them.Methods of FeedingA popular method of feeding is known as ‘free-feeding’. This is where a bowl of food is left out so that a pet can eat as much or as little and as frequently as they prefer. This works best for dry foods since they do not spoil as quickly as the wet variety. Some studies show that this method results in over-eating and subsequent pet obesity. However it may be the best option for you if you cannot stick to a feeding schedule.Scheduled portioned feeding requires a strict routine that you need to be able to guarantee to stick to. Your pet will know when meal times are and ensure that they are ready for them, with cats coming indoors specifically at these times. This method limits the amount that your pet eats either by portion size or by time as some pet owners prefer to give their animals a specific time frame in which they must eat. This method also works well if you have pets that required medication to be mixed with their food, or have an animal on a calorie-controlled diet.If you are unsure which method is right for your pet, consult with your veterinarian who will be more than happy to provide advice.General Feeding AdviceDo NOT offer home cooked meals. These may not meet the complex nutritional needs of your pet. Instead stick to especially formulated pet foods.DogsThe first ingredient listed in any dog food should be a specified meat. If the first ingredient listed is a wheat, corn, meat by-product or bone meal then this dog food should be avoided. Dogs’ teeth are primarily made up of canines which are designed for shredding meat not grinding grains.Dogs should be kept on the same brand and type of food as much as possible. Regularly changing them could cause him to have an upset stomach. If you do have to change then try and introduce the new food gradually so that your dogs’ digestive system has a chance to adjust.CatsTo cats the odor of their food is particularly important and they prefer their food to be around body temperature when they consume it. Glass or ceramic bowls do not absorb externals odors and are the best choice for feeding. They also like to be able to see their surroundings when they eat and not backed into a corner.Cats naturally prefer grazing on small meals and so dry food free-feeding is often the most popular choice for mealtimes.Protein and fats are the most palatable types of food for cats and they much prefer the texture of meat to anything else.RabbitsRabbits need at least one bunny-sized bundle of hay every day. Accompany this with a handful of washed leafy green vegetables or herbs such as kale, lettuce, broccoli, sage or mint. Try and offer variety to ensure your rabbit gets a good mix of nutrients.Lawnmower clippings are NOT safe for your rabbit to eat.When choosing pellets opting for good quality is important. As a general rule you should feed your rabbit one eggcup of pellets per kg of your rabbits’ weight. E.g. if you rabbit weights 1kg then you should only give them one eggcup of pellets every day.Do not give your rabbit muesli!Treats for rabbits should be infrequent and limited to carrots and apples. Helpful Articles DogsCanine Distemper Canine Parvovirus Picking Your Perfect Puppy CatsFeline Distemper Picking Your Perfect Cat HealthDental Hygiene and Care Euthanasia Feeding Your Pet Flea Prevention and Care General Pet Safety Heartworm Heatstroke Awareness Pet Grooming Pet Obesity Recognizing An Ill Pet Seasonal Care Ticks Vaccinations and Examinations GeneralBringing Your Pet Home Pets and Kids How to Adopt Traveling With Your Pet Training Your Pet Finding a Reputable Breeder InformationAddress: 611 West St, Grinnell, IA 50112 Phone: 641-236-6869 Email: staff.allpets@gmail.com Useful LinksServices Meet The Team Online Forms Privacy Policy Office HoursDayTimeMonday8:00 - 5:00Tuesday8:00 - 5:00Wednesday8:00 - 5:00Thursday8:00 - 8:00Friday8:00 - 5:00Saturday9:00 - 12:00SundayClosed Powered by Form submitted successfully! You are missing required fields. Dynamic Error Description There was an error processing this form. Close Experience Excellence in Veterinary Care CellHomeWork DogCat JanuaryFebruaryMarchAprilMayJuneJulyAugustSeptemberOctoberNovemberDecember 12345678910111213141516171819202122232425262728293031 8:00am9:00am10:00am11:00am12:00pm1:00pm2:00pm3:00pm4:00pm5:00pm We will review your request and confirm your appointment as soon as possible. Form submitted successfully! You are missing required fields. Dynamic Error Description There was an error processing this form. Close × Login Forgot Password? OR Sign in with Facebook Sign in with Google Looking to create an account ? Already have an account? Login × Save Search × Saved Searches × Modal title One fine body… Close Save changes × Update Profile Email Name Password Confirm Password 

518 45A Street 1.888.665.0856 Contact Us Print 0 - $0.00 CAD Your shopping cart is empty! Customer Login Retailer Login HomeDogsPuppy NutritionPuppy DevelopmentPuppy Feeding ChartsFeeding CalculatorDog Feeding BehaviorDog Pregnancy & LactationDog NutritionDog EvolutionCanine DesignDiet TransitionCatsCat EvolutionCat NutritionKitten NutritionPregnancy & LactationSample Menu For KittensFeeding CalculationsCat Feeding BehaviourDiet TransitionFeline DesignUsRetailersLocate A RetailerProductsEducational Videos and BooksWhole Animal Dinners (with 5% veg & fruit)Whole Animal DietsHealth Care / SupplementsRaw Meaty BonesSpecialty Diet OptionsPixiesLearnGeneralFAQsHistory of Dog FoodRaw or CookedThe Question of BacteriaWhat Is In Some Other Dog FoodsWhy Dogs Eat PoopWhat's In KibbleRaw DietIt’s not in the Bag!Feature ArticlesHealthDiabetesDog ParasitesHypothyroidismCarnivores & Liver Disease Pet ConstipationPet Emergency First AidSupplementsEFA SupplementationFeeding Pets For CancerFood Variety For PetsPet SupplementsContact Looking for our Supplements? Buy Supplements Here! Dog Feeding BehaviorWild canids such as wolves, coyotes, and foxes, detect prey through scent, tracking and chance encounters. Although these animals are skilled predators, researchers have long noted that they are opportunists as well, preferring to take down the very young, the very old, the weak, or the diseased of its prey species. As you might expect, these disadvantaged animals are the easiest to catch. Weakened animals are easy to spot, advertising their condition to canid predators through body stance, uncoordinated or slow movements, the smell of wounds or infection or some other tangible signal. The only animal that habitually preys upon prime, mature animals is man. Despite the preference for easier kills, the wild canids’ predation efficiency is surprisingly low. Contrary to popular belief, most prey chased by wild canids actually gets away. However, once a weak individual is selected, it is usually brought down after a chase. Generally, the chases are short but there are exceptions. The actions of a predator pack are dependent on many things, including how hungry they are, which prey species they are hunting, and, the reaction of their targeted prey. Prey that runs is usually chased while prey that stands its ground may be able to bluff off its pursuers. When studying the relationship between predator and larger prey animals we see that it is not only prey species that are at risk during confrontations. Large prey such as deer or moose can easily inflict serious wounds to attacking predators, sometimes even fatal ones. Cracked ribs, open wounds, and even broken legs are a major risk for the hunters. Wild canids use various strategies when hunting. Although somewhat unclear, it appears they employ what seems to be a conscious strategy - sending out one or two animals in the pack to herd prey into an ambush. For instance, they prefer to attack sheep from above. They may split-up to skirt both sides of an area and then flush herbivore prey toward a middle point where they cannot escape. They reputedly lay low in the grass, switching their tails from side to side to attract curious prey. They have been observed herding prey onto lake ice where the large animals loose their footing. Unless the wild canid locates their prey by chance encounter, their manner of approaching the prey animal usually goes unchanged. Direct scenting and tracking both allow the sensing of prey for long distances moving directly upwind. As they close the gap between themselves and their prey they become eager but remain restrained. They quicken their paces, wag their tails, and peer ahead intently. They seem anxious to leap forward at full speed but continue to hold themselves in check. This stalking scenario is true whether hunting alone, in a small pack or a large one. In cases where the stalk is used, they steal as close to the prey as they can without making it flee. The phase of the hunt that immediately follows the stalk is the encounter, the point at which prey and predator confront each other. The prey animal responds by approaching the predator or standing its ground or fleeing. Seldom do prey animals approach the wild canid, however; moose, elk, and musk oxen are known to stand their ground, probably due to their formidable sizes. As soon as the predators see their quarry has sensed them but is not running, they stop their stalk. Larger prey is usually able to fend off a pack of predators. Smaller prey such as deer or the calves of larger prey are almost defenseless. The flight of the prey during the encounter stage of the hunt almost always results in an immediate rush. The rush is the most critical stage of the hunt. If the canid predator fails to get close to their quarry during this stage, the prey runs off at top speed and the predators may never get close to it. The final stage of the hunt is the chase, which is really a continuation of the rush, in which the prey flees and the predators follow. If they catch up to their quarry, they may attack. If they fall behind, they give up quickly. Although the pursuit sometimes goes on for miles, it usually covers a shorter distance and lasts only a few minutes. When the canid predators attack they usually seize their prey, especially larger species, by the rump or the nose. The actual death of the prey usually results from massive blood loss, shock, or both. With smaller prey such as hare, a neck bite will often snap the backbone. Although wild canids will gorge if they have gone hungry for several days, or even an entire week, they do not overeat. The ingestion of food is regulated by the liver, which stores excess glucose as glycogen, and by the hunger and satiety centers in the brain. When the liver is topped up with glycogen, their satiety centre is activated and they will not eat. After going hungry for a time, the liver's supply of glycogen is released into the blood as glucose. When the supply is depleted the hunger centre is activated. No soft portion of a large or small prey carcass is ignored by hungry canids and seemingly obscure parts may be important sources of required nutrients or aid in absorbing other sources. Wild canids generally tear into the body cavity of large prey, pulling out and consuming the large internal organs, such as lungs, liver, and heart. The large rumen is usually punctured during removal and its content spilled. The plant material in the intestinal tract is of little interest to wolves, but the stomach lining and intestinal wall are consumed. Smaller internal organs, such as kidneys and spleen, are then exposed and eaten without delay. Sometimes the rumen contents, with or without the surrounding rumen wall freeze and become one of few signs left of a winter kill. The liver of prey may be one of the more important organs for wild canids to eat, based on the variety of important vitamins and minerals it provides. Brain tissue contains the highest amount of polyunsaturated fatty acids, some of which are required for body maintenance. Thus the brain of prey animals is inevitably eaten, so long as wild canids are able to break open the skull. Mucous membranes, an important part of ungulate stomachs, intestines and snouts are a vital source of essential fatty acids. Muscle tissue contains only about 1% essential fatty acids, while the heart contains 3-4%, the liver 4-7% and the brain over 11%. After choice organs are consumed, the large muscle masses (meat) associated with a prey animal provides the bulk of the food consumed. All muscle tissue is very high in protein, containing all of the essential amino acids. Muscle tissue is very low in carbohydrates. The fat content of meat can vary widely depending on the species and breed of animal, and the anatomical part of its body. Bones and other connective tissue from prey are required by wild canids as the major source of calcium for the maintenance of their own skeletons. Bone combined with meat is extremely well-balanced food for canids. In the nineteenth century, dogs experimentally fed only tendons died, but dogs fed only fresh bones thrived for long periods. Single wild canids, which often scavenge, may not see a fresh kill for weeks, yet they maintain themselves on a diet of bones from old kills. Fresh bone, containing marrow, may provide 15-20% protein and an equivalent amount of fat. The wild canids' diet, except for hide and bone, is highly digestible - generally in excess of 90%, based on experiments with domestic dogs. Fat is the most thoroughly digested component of the diet (97%), followed by protein (93%). The wild canids’ digestive system is so strong that it usually breaks down every bit of protein that has been eaten. As a result, their scats (stool) contain very little fecal matter. The stool is usually grey or white and contains chips of bone and fur compacted and held together by mucus. Its interior is yellowish and granular and, even in a fresh dropping, little odor reaches the human nose. Plant matter is consumed separately, particularly ripe wild fruit. Wild canids eat grass (14-43% frequency) possibly to clean the digestive tract and purge the intestines of parasites or the stomach of hair that delays passage of food through the gut. Made up of cellulose, the grass itself is never digested. Grass is particularly favored in the spring and fall when it is most succulent, sweet and interestingly when the protein content is somewhat higher. What’s on the Wild Canids’ Menu? Wolf Small prey is frequently eaten by wolves in the summer but relatively little of the wolf's food come from small prey. The major sources of meat in the wolf's diet are moose, elk, musk ox, Dall sheep, Rocky Mountain sheep, bison, caribou, reindeer or deer, depending on the area, the season and the year. Two wolves consuming a caribou carcass provide an example of wolf feeding behavior. "In the first 15 minutes, the back strap, some skin, haunch muscles, some ribs, a kidney and a piece of small intestine were consumed. A caching trip of 20 minutes was then undertaken and in the ensuing 2 hours, meat from the backbone, rib cage, haunch, and legs was eaten and the lungs were removed. In the next 2 hours, meat from the ribs and a leg was eaten; then the carcass was left for 4 hours, presumably while the wolves slept. They returned to feed over a 3 hour period on muscle from the ribs and hindquarters plus mesenteries. After 10 hours, part of the heart was eaten and the remainder cached, the lungs were eaten and another caching trip was undertaken." Wolves also prey on beaver, snowshoe hare, ducks, marmots, mice, squirrels, grouse, geese, and rabbits. Wolves fish too, by wade-herding and trapping salmon, arctic grayling or whitefish. They eat carrion and occasionally insects, especially when they encounter them in epidemic populations. Perhaps because of the greater availability of fruit, wolves in parts of Europe may feed on plant material more extensively than those in North America. Fruit may provide vitamins for wolves in summer, as even in North America it is not uncommon to find seeds from raspberries and blueberries in wolf scats. Cherries, berries, apples, figs, pears, plums, grapes, melon and watermelon have been reported in wolf scats. Coyote Although coyotes aren't considered genetically related to the domestic dog as are wolves; their eating habits provide useful comparisons about carnivore nutrition. Not many mammals and very few carnivores are able to live well on a diet as varied as that of the coyote. Biologists have analyzed coyote stomach contents in various parts of North America and the results are pretty much the same. Coyotes depend on smaller mammals, especially rodents, for half of all their bulk and nutrition. Rabbits, hares, gophers, ground squirrels and especially mice are what a coyote is most likely to encounter during a typically meandering hunting trip. But these hunters will also eat any bird, insects, reptiles, amphibians or even fish they can catch. All kinds of vegetable matter, including some greens and especially fruit are consumed too. In one study, a coyote's stomach contained over five hundred grasshoppers. Rattlesnakes, meadowlarks, frogs, blackbirds, fallen apples, and persimmons are all fair game. So are large animals, wild and domestic, depending on the season, availability and the locality. Red Fox Biologists estimate that a healthy fox can travel through dense bush at speeds up to thirty miles per hour, seeming to glide over deadfalls or duck under them with equal ease. That is fast enough to capture most of the sixty-three species of small animals, birds, and insects found in its diet. However, cottontail rabbits, meadow voles, mice, and insects make up two-thirds of that total. Young birds, like quail, pheasants, and grouse are caught and eaten each spring. In late summer and fall, especially during years of abundance, foxes eat quantities of both cultivated fruits and berries. An orchard where ripened apples or pears have fallen to the ground is a good place to watch at daybreak and dusk for red foxes as well as for coyotes and gray foxes. Gray foxes are able to forage in trees. This is done by gripping a trunk with its forepaws, then gradually pushing itself higher with the long claws of its rear feet. The fox is comfortable enough in some trees to be able to jump or climb from limb to limb when hunting birds, especially small bird nests that contain eggs or hatchlings. Our chief scientist Mother Nature is pleased to offer you some of her finest work. The information on this website is not intended to replace Veterinary medical advice. Carnivora™ 518 45A Street 1.888.665.0856 Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Search Site Map © 2023 Carnivora™. All Rights Reserved. Home Dogs Puppy Nutrition Puppy Development Puppy Feeding Charts Feeding Calculator Dog Feeding Behavior Dog Pregnancy & Lactation Dog Nutrition Dog Evolution Canine Design Diet Transition Cats Cat Evolution Cat Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Pregnancy & Lactation Sample Menu For Kittens Feeding Calculations Cat Feeding Behaviour Diet Transition Feline Design Us Retailers Locate A Retailer Products Educational Videos and Books Whole Animal Dinners (with 5% veg & fruit) Whole Animal Diets Health Care / Supplements Raw Meaty Bones Specialty Diet Options Pixies LearnGeneral FAQs History of Dog Food Raw or Cooked The Question of Bacteria What Is In Some Other Dog Foods Why Dogs Eat Poop What's In Kibble Raw Diet It’s not in the Bag! Feature ArticlesHealth Diabetes Dog Parasites Hypothyroidism Carnivores & Liver Disease Pet Constipation Pet Emergency First AidSupplements EFA Supplementation Feeding Pets For Cancer Food Variety For Pets Pet Supplements Contact 

(813) 839-7715 Mon-Fri 7a-7p | Sat 8a-4p Home Brandon South Tampa Book Now Brandon South Tampa Blog Contact Brandon South Tampa Top 4 Food Habits to Inculcate in Your Dog September 8th, 2017 by admin Posted in Brandon Dog Care Tags: Dog Care, Dog Food Do you share your dinner or perhaps a bite of your snack with your furry little friend? While dogs are just too cute to say no, especially when they look at you with those adorable puppy-eyes, human foods are not appropriate for dogs. The digestive system of dogs are different than that of humans and certain foods can actually be harmful for your canine. It is important that you inculcate healthy food habits in your dog from as early as possible. But for that you need to discipline yourself as well. For instance, stop giving your dog treats throughout the day; instead, follow regular meal times. Also, avoid over-feeding your dog and don’t encourage feeding from the table. You need to teach your dog to differentiate between dog food and human food and provide them with high quality canine food that are designed to keep them healthy. The following are 4 top food habits you need to teach your dog. 1. Feed Him Fresh Whole Foods According to a Brandon pet care center, fresh vegetables and fruits are essential for your dog’s health. These whole foods are packed with live enzymes and fiber, which helps digestion and improves their defecation. While dogs are carnivores and meat is their natural food, an all-meat diet also contains higher toxin levels. Fresh vegetables and fruits, on the other hand, help alkalize the body and help your dog avoid developing chronic diseases. In fact, vegetables and fruits can be a great alternative to the store-bought shelf-stable foods that you often serve as snacks. These shelf-stable foods have a longer cooking processes, which kill many of the nutrients. As a result, synthetic nutrients are added to the products to retain their food value. However, unlike synthetic nutrients, fresh vegetables and fruits have nutritional co-factors that help the body to better absorb and assimilate the nutrients. So next time you want to treat your dog, try a piece of carrot. In fact, it is also a good bone substitute for your dog’s teeth and gum maintenance. Pure vegetables too is a great option for maximum nutrient absorption. However, also remember that certain vegetables and fruits (and also parts of certain vegetables and fruits) can be poisonous for your dog and should be avoided. Talk to your vet before you start feeding your dog these whole foods. 2. Counter Condition Your Finicky Dog Does your dog just sniffs his food and rejects all but a few bites? You probably have a finicky dog! Now, there are many reasons for his behavior, ranging from his health to what and how you are feeding him. A dog can become finicky if he is sick; so if you observe that your dog has not only lost his appetite, but is also avoiding regular play and behaves in a disengaged manner, it’s time to get a vet appointment and get a thorough check-up. But if it is not his health, you need to correct the behavior of your finicky dog. As said earlier, avoid feeding your dog table scraps and/or too many treats. If your dog is more excited about the treats and things you feed him from the table, he will eventually lose interest in what’s in the bowl. Similarly, don’t offer several different foods to your dog, trying to coax him into eating something every meal. This will only encourage him to hold out for something better. Instead, follow these steps to correct the bahavior: Make it clear to your dog that that no other options exist Wait for 30 minutes after giving the food; if he doesn’t eat, take it away Set out the same food during the next meal; wait for 30 minutes and take away the food if it is still not eaten Maintain your strategy and don’t give in even if your dog is checking around for extra treats. Your dog will eat if he is hungry However, remember that it may take a little time to eliminate the finicky eating behavior. In addition, you need to careful about certain things when it comes to counter conditioning your finicky dog. If you are changing his food formula, do it gradually. For example, if you are changing from wet to dry food, mix the dry food with a small amount of warm water if the beginning. Also, combine the new food with the old food to help your dog get accustomed to the new food. 3. Try Not to Serve Cooked Meat While we don’t want our dogs to become the hunters that they have descendent from, cooked meat is something you can avoid feeding your dog whenever possible. When we cook food, we lose many beneficial nutrients. The same happens when you cook food for your dog. The reason behind this is that the muscles of animals when cooked at high temperatures, releases carcinogenic chemicals called heterocyclic amines (HCAs), which may increase the risk of cancer. And this too applies in case of your dog. If you still prefer to feed your dog cooked meat, try searing it slightly rather than cooking it through. 4. Add Essential Fatty Acids to His Diet Healthy fats are essential for your dog’s health, especially for his coat. For example, if you dog has fatty acid deficiency, it is more likely to have a dull coat and have dandruff and a dull and flaky skin. Fortunately, most dog foods are very high in Omega-3 and Omega-6. Additionally, you can also feed your dog supplements and certain whole foods like chia seed, flaxseed, hempseed, and small amounts of fresh sardines. It is better to avoid fish oils (or at least consult your vet before feeding them to your dog) as they turn rancid very easily and can affect your dog’s liver and kidneys in the long run. Also avoid giving too many fatty acid supplements, as it may cause upset stomachs and vomiting. Conclusion Nobody knows your dog better than you, so you are the best person to judge your furry friend’s diet. Discipline your dog from day 1 when it comes to food. Don’t ever let the guilty of leaving your dog alone at home make you feed or treat him more often. Learning healthy food habits takes time; be patient, your furry bundle of joy will eventually reach there and enjoy a healthy and strong life. Watch Video 4313 W. Pearl Ave., Tampa, FL 33611 © 2023 Tampa Puppy Palace. All Rights Reserved. Design & Developed by TranquilBlue 

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Search Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1History 2Commercial varieties Toggle Commercial varieties subsection 2.1Dry 2.1.1Manufacturing process 2.2Wet 2.2.1Manufacturing process 2.3Semi-moist 2.4Dehydrated and freeze-dried 2.5Contents 2.6Quality, digestibility and energy density 2.7Labeling 3Types of diets Toggle Types of diets subsection 3.1Raw 3.2Senior 3.3Low-protein 3.3.1Disadvantages 3.3.2Advantages 3.4Hypoallergenic 3.5Grain-free and low-carbohydrate 3.6Vegetarian and vegan 4Nutrients and supplements 5Chart 6Dangers Toggle Dangers subsection 6.1Recalls 6.2Contaminants 6.2.1Mycotoxins 6.2.2Salmonella and copper 7In popular culture 8See also 9References 10External links Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Dog food 25 languages DanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançaisBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתJawaMagyarBahasa Melayu日本語Norsk bokmålРусскийSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнська粵語中文 Edit links ArticleTalk English ReadEditView history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationGet shortened URLCite this pageWikidata item Print/export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Food intended for consumption by dogs usually made from meat This article is about food that is produced to feed dogs. For the human consumption of dog flesh and parts, see Dog meat. For other uses, see Dog food (disambiguation). The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Dry dog food in a bowl Dog food is food specifically formulated and intended for consumption by dogs and other related canines. Dogs are considered to be omnivores with a carnivorous bias. They have the sharp, pointed teeth and shorter gastrointestinal tracts of carnivores, better suited for the consumption of meat than of vegetable substances, yet also have ten genes that are responsible for starch and glucose digestion, as well as the ability to produce amylase, an enzyme that functions to break down carbohydrates into simple sugars – something that obligate carnivores like cats lack.[1] Dogs evolved the ability living alongside humans in agricultural societies, as they managed on scrap leftovers and excrement from humans.[2][3][4] Dogs have managed to adapt over thousands of years to survive on the meat and non-meat scraps and leftovers of human existence and thrive on a variety of foods, with studies suggesting dogs' ability to digest carbohydrates easily may be a key difference between dogs and wolves.[1] The dog food recommendation should be based on nutrient suitability instead of dog's preferences. Pet owners should consider their dog's breed, size, age, and health condition and choose food that is appropriate for their dog's nutritional needs.[5] In the United States alone, the dog food market is expected to reach $23.3 billion by 2022.[6] History[edit] Prior to being domesticated, dogs, being canines, fended for themselves and survived on a carnivorous diet. After adapting them for protection, work, and companionship, people began to care at least in part for their nutritional needs. The historic record of this changing approach dates back at least 2,000 years. In 37 BCE, Virgil talks about the feeding of dogs in his Bucolics: Nec tibi cura canum fuerit postrema; sed una Veloces Spartae catulos, acremque Molossum, Pasce sero pingui:[7] "Do not let the care of dogs be last; but the swift Spartan hounds, and fierce Mastiff, Feed the whey" Around 70 CE, Columella wrote his book On Agriculture in which he addresses the feeding of dogs: Cibaria fere eadem sunt utrique generi praebenda. Nam si tam laxa rura sunt, ut sustineant pecorum greges, omnis sine discrimine hordeacea farina cum sero commode pascit. Sin autem surculo consitus ager sine pascuo est, farreo vel triticeo pane satiandi sunt, admixto tamen liquore coctae fabae, sed tepido, nam fervens rabiem creat.[8] "Provisions of victuals are almost the same for both [types of dog]. If the fields are so large as to sustain herds of animals, barley meal mixed with whey is a convenient food. But if it is an orchard without grain, spelt or wheat bread is fed mixed with the liquid from cooked beans, but warm, for boiling creates rabies." In the Avesta, written from 224 to 651 CE, Ahura Mazda advises: Bring ye unto him milk and fat with meat; this is the right food for the dog.[9] By Medieval times, dogs were more seen as pets rather than just companions and workers which affected their quality of the diet to include "Besides being fed bran bread, the dogs would also get some of the meat from the hunt. If a dog was sick, he would get better food, such as goat's milk, bean broth, chopped meat, or buttered eggs." In France, the word pâtée began to appear in the 18th century and referred to a paste originally given to poultry. In 1756, a dictionary indicates it was made of a mixture of bread crumbs and little pieces of meat given to pets.[10] In 1781, an encyclopedia mentioned an earlier practice of removing the liver, heart, and blood of a downed stag and mixing it with milk, cheese, and bread, and then giving it to dogs.[11] In 1844, the French writer, Nicolas Boyard, warned against even giving tallow graves (the dregs of the tallow pot) to dogs, though the English favored them (see below), and suggested a meat-flavored soup: By a misguided economy dogs are given meat scraps and tallow graves; one must avoid this, because these foods make them heavy and sick; give them twice a day a soup of coarse bread made with water, fat and the bottom of the stew pot; put a half-kilogram of bread at least in each soup.[12] In England, care to give dogs particular food dates at least from the late eighteenth century, when The Sportsman's dictionary (1785) described the best diet for a dog's health in its article "Dog": A dog is of a very hot nature: he should therefore never be without clean water by him, that he may drink when he is thirsty. In regard to their food, carrion is by no means proper for them. It must hurt their sense of smelling, on which the excellence of these dogs greatly depends. Barley meal, the dross of wheatflour, or both mixed together, with broth or skim'd milk, is very proper food. For change, a small quantity of greaves from which the tallow is pressed by the chandlers, mixed with their flour; or sheep's feet well baked or boiled, are a very good diet, and when you indulge them with flesh it should always be boiled. In the season of hunting your dogs, it is proper to feed them in the evening before, and give them nothing in the morning you take them out, except a little milk. If you stop for your own refreshment in the day, you should also refresh your dogs with a little milk and bread.[13] In 1833, The Complete Farrier gave similar but far more extensive advice on feeding dogs:[14] The dog is neither wholly carnivorous nor wholly herbivorous, but of a mixed kind, and can receive nourishment from either flesh or vegetables. A mixture of both is therefore his proper food,[15] but of the former he requires a greater portion, and this portion should be always determined by his bodily exertions. It was not until the mid-1800s that the world saw its first food made specifically for dogs. An American electrician, James Spratt, concocted the first dog treat. Living in London at the time, he witnessed dogs around a shipyard eating scraps of discarded biscuits. Shortly thereafter he introduced his dog food, made up of wheat meals, vegetables and meat. By 1890 production had begun in the United States and became known as "Spratt's Patent Limited". In later years, dog biscuit was sometimes treated as synonymous with dog food: The first three prize winners at the late coursing meeting at Great Bend were trained on Spratt's Patent Dog Biscuit. This same dog food won no less than three awards, including a gold medal, at the Exposition in Paris which has just closed. It would seem that the decision of the judges is more than backed up by the result in the kennel. Another good dog food is that manufactured by Austin & Graves, of Boston. They, too, seem to be meeting with great success in their line.[16] Canned horse meat was introduced in the United States under the Ken-L Ration brand after World War I as a means to dispose of excess horses no longer needed for the war.[17] The 1930s saw the introduction of canned cat food and dry meat-meal dog food by the Gaines Food Co. By the time World War II ended, pet food sales had reached $200 million. In the 1950s Spratt's became part of General Mills. For companies such as Nabisco, Quaker Oats, and General Foods, pet food represented an opportunity to market by-products as a profitable source of income.[18] Commercial varieties[edit] Dog kibble Most commercially produced dog food is made with animal feed grade ingredients and comes dry in bags (also known in the US as kibble) or wet in cans. Dry food contains 6–10% moisture by volume, as compared to 60–90% in canned food. Semi-moist products typically run 25–35%. Isotopic analysis of dog food in the Brazilian market have found that they are basically made of maize and poultry by-products.[19] Dry[edit] Dry dog food usually consists of bagged pellets that contain 3-11% water.[20] It makes up the vast majority of pet foods.[21] Manufacturing process[edit] See also: Food extrusion Dry food processing is popular in the pet food industry, as it is an efficient way to supply continuous production of feed in many varieties. It is energy efficient, allows for large amounts of feed to be used, and is cost effective.[22] To make dog kibble, a process known as extrusion is done. A simple extruder consists of a barrel, helical screws, and a die (tool to cut and shape food). Feed ingredients are solid at room temperature; therefore, the extrusion process of these ingredients requires a temperature above 150 degrees Celsius, achieved by the use of steam, hot water, or other heat sources in order to soften or melt the mixture and allow for fluidity through the barrel. During the extrusion process, the high amounts of pressure applied to the mixture forces it to enter through the die before exiting the extruder completely, where it is cut to its desired size by a rotating fly knife.[23] Unfortunately, the extrusion process actually denatures some of nutritional elements of the food. Taurine deficiency has been found in dogs[24] and cats[25] fed extruded commercial diets. Not usually considered an essential nutrient for dogs, taurine is plentiful in most whole meats, whether raw or cooked,[26] but is reduced in extruded diets. Taurine deficiency could also be due to the use of rendered, highly processed meat sources that are low in taurine. Regardless of the cause, taurine is now artificially supplemented back into the diet after processing in the production of most commercial pet food. Wet[edit] Canned food with shredded meat Wet or canned dog food usually is packaged in a solid or soft-sided container. Wet food contains roughly 60-78% water,[20] which is significantly higher in moisture than dry or semi-moist food.[27] Canned food is commercially sterile (cooked during canning); other wet foods may not be sterile. Sterilizing is done through the process of retorting, which involves steam sterilization at 121 degrees Celsius.[28][29] A given wet food will often be higher in protein or fat compared to a similar dry food on a dry matter basis (a measure which ignores moisture); given the canned food's high moisture content. A larger amount of canned food must be fed in order to meet the dog's required needs. Grain gluten and other protein gels may be used in wet dog food to create artificial meaty chunks, which look like real meat. This food is usually used for old dogs or puppies. Manufacturing process[edit] After ingredients are combined, they are placed in a tank at the end of a canning machine.[29] From there, the mixture is forced through an opening and onto a metal sheet, forming a thickness of 8 to 12mm.[29] Next, the mixture is heated to thoroughly cook the ingredients.[29] Heating can be done through the means of ovens, microwaves or steam heating.[29] The sheet containing a layer of feed is passed through the heat source that displays heat to the top and bottom of the tray, allowing the internal temperature to reach 77 degrees Celsius at a minimum.[29] Once cooked, this mixture can be directly placed into cans to form a loaf or it can be cut into "meaty" pieces for chunks and gravy formulas.[29] Semi-moist[edit] Semi-moist dog food is packaged in vacuum-sealed pouches or packets. It contains about 20-45% water by weight, making it more expensive per energy calorie than dry food. Most semi-moist food does not require refrigeration. They are lightly cooked and then quickly sealed in a vacuum package. This type of dog food is extremely vulnerable to spoiling if not kept at a cool temperature and has a shelf life of 2–4 months, unopened. Dehydrated and freeze-dried[edit] Dehydrated or freeze-dried meals come in raw and cooked forms. Products are usually air-dried or frozen, then dehydrated (freeze-dried) to reduce moisture to the level where bacterial growths are inhibited. The appearance is very similar to dry dog pellets. The typical feeding methods include adding warm water before serving. There is some concern of nutrients, such as vitamins, being lost during the dehydration process. Specialty small batches sold through specialty or online stores generally consist of some form of cooked meat, ground bone, pureed vegetables, taurine supplements, and other multivitamin supplements. Some pet owners use human vitamin supplements, and others use vitamin supplements specifically engineered for dogs.[30][31] Contents[edit] Many commercial dog foods are made from materials considered by some authorities and dog owners to be unusable or undesirable.[32] These may include: Meat and bone meal Offal (wild canines eat offal as a vital part of their diets) Animal digest Sucrose and/or fructose Animal by-products Less expensive dog foods generally include less meat and more animal by-products and grain fillers. Proponents of a natural diet criticize the use of such ingredients, and point out that regulations allow for packaging that might lead a consumer to believe that they are buying natural food, when, in reality, the food might be composed mostly of ingredients such as those listed above.[33][34] More expensive dog foods may be made of ingredients suitable for organic products or free range meats. Lamb meal is a popular ingredient. According to the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), animal by-products in pet food may include parts obtained from any animals that have died from sickness or disease, provided they are rendered in accordance to law. Cow brains and spinal cords not allowed for human consumption under federal regulation 21CFR589.2000 due to the possibility of transmission of BSE are allowed to be included in pet food intended for non-ruminant animals.[35] In 2003, the AVMA speculated changes might be made to animal feed regulations to ban materials from "4-D" animals – those who enter the food chain as dead, dying, diseased or disabled.[36] Dog treats are special types of dog food given as a reward, not as a staple food source. Quality, digestibility and energy density[edit] There are a few key components to consider when evaluating dietary needs. These factors include the quality and digestibility of the protein provided in the diet, as well as the composition of the amino acids included, and finally the energy density provided in the diet.[37] Diets containing proteins that are high in quality, composition, and digestibility require less of that protein to be present. The same can be said in regards to the energy density.[37] In contrast, high-protein diets will provide excess protein content after meeting maintenance demands; this can therefore lead to the protein being utilized in fat and energy storage.[37] This ultimately increases the risk for developing obesity and other health related issues.[38] Higher protein in the diet helps reduce lean body mass loss,[39] but will not lead to an increase in size of muscle[40] unless paired with resistance exercises[41] or anabolic steroids under maintenance conditions. Labeling[edit] Further information: Pet food § Labeling and regulation In the United States, dog foods labelled as "complete and balanced" must meet standards established by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), either by meeting a nutrient profile or by passing a feeding trial. The Dog Food Nutrient Profiles were last updated in 2016 by the AAFCO's Canine Nutrition Expert Subcommittee.[42] Critics argue that due to the limitations of the trial and the gaps in knowledge within animal nutrition science, the term "complete and balanced" is inaccurate and even deceptive. An AAFCO panel expert has stated that "although the AAFCO profiles are better than nothing, they provide false securities."[43] Certain manufacturers label their products with terms such as "premium", "ultra premium", "natural", and "holistic". Such terms currently have no legal definitions and are not regulated. There are also varieties of dog food labeled as "human-grade food." Although no official definition of this term exists, the assumption is that other brands use foods that would not pass US Food and Drug Administration inspection according to the Pure Food and Drug Act or the Meat Inspection Act.[44] The ingredients on the label must be listed in descending order by weight before cooking. This means before all of the moisture is removed from the meat, fruits, vegetables and other ingredients used.[45] Types of diets[edit] Raw[edit] Main article: Raw feeding Raw feeding is the practice of feeding domestic dogs, cats and other animals a diet consisting primarily of uncooked meat, edible bones, and organs. The ingredients used to formulate raw diets can vary. Some pet owners choose to make homemade raw diets to feed their animals but commercial raw food diets are also available.[46][47] Frozen, or fresh-prepared, meals come in raw or cooked form, some of which is made with ingredients that are inspected, approved, and certified by the USDA for human consumption, but formulated for pets.[48] Part of this growing trend is the commercialization of home-made dog food for pet owners who want the same quality, but do not have the time or expertise to make it themselves.[49] The advantage is forgoing the processing stage that traditional dog food undergoes. This causes less destruction of its nutritional integrity. The practice of feeding raw diets has raised some concerns due to the risk of foodborne illnesses, zoonosis and nutritional imbalances.[50] People who feed their dogs raw food do so for a multitude of reasons, including but not limited to: culture, beliefs surrounding health, nutrition and what is perceived to be more natural for their pets.[51] Feeding raw food can be perceived as allowing the pet to stay in touch with their wild, carnivorous ancestry.[51] The raw food movement has occurred in parallel to the change in human food trends for more natural and organic products.[46] Senior[edit] Main article: Senior dog diet Aging dogs require specialized catering. Commercially available senior dog diets address their physiological changes through various ingredients and nutrients. When looking for a senior dog food, one of the first things that should be taken into consideration is the energy content of the diet. The maintenance energy requirements decrease as a dog ages due to the loss in lean body mass that occurs.[52] Therefore, senior dogs will require a diet with a lowered energy content compared to non senior diets. Although senior dogs require lower energy content diets, they will also require diets that are higher in protein and protein digestibility. This is due to the fact that dogs have a reduced ability to synthesize proteins as they age.[53] Joint and bone health is an important factor to be considered when purchasing a senior dog food. The addition of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate has been shown to improve cartilage formation, the composition of synovial fluid, as well as improve signs of osteoarthritis.[54] The calcium to phosphorus ratio of senior dog foods is also important. Calcium and phosphorus are considered essential nutrients, according to AAFCO. Gastrointestinal health is another important factor to consider in the aging dog. Sources of fiber such as beet pulp and flaxseed should be included within senior dog foods to help improve stool quality and prevent constipation.[55][56] A current technology that is being used to improve gastrointestinal health of aging dogs is the addition of fructooligosacchardies and mannanoligosaccharides. These oligosaccharides are used in combination to improve the beneficial gut bacteria while eliminating the harmful gut bacteria.[57] The aging dog goes through changes in brain and cognitive health.[58] There are two highly important ingredients that can be included in senior dog foods to help prevent cognitive decline and improve brain health. These ingredients are vitamin E and L-carnitine. Vitamin E acts as an antioxidant, which can prevent oxidative damage that occurs during aging.[58] L-carnitine is used to improve mitochondrial function, which can also help to prevent and lower rates of oxidative damage.[58] Skin and coat health is important in all dogs, but especially becomes important as dogs age. An important nutrient to look for in senior dog foods to support coat health is linoleic acid, which can be found in corn and soybean oil.[59] Another important nutrient is vitamin A, which helps with keratinization of hair.[60] Good sources of vitamin A for skin and coat health include egg yolk and liver.[61] Immune system health has been shown to decline in aging dogs. The ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids plays an important role in providing optimal health.[62] Vitamin E can be used as an antioxidant in senior dog foods.[62] Pre- and probiotics can also be added to senior dog foods to help improve the beneficial bacteria in the gut, providing support for the immune system.[63] Low-protein[edit] According to The Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) nutrient guideline for cats and dogs, the minimum protein requirement for dogs during adult maintenance is 18% on a dry matter (DM) basis.[64] Other parts of the world would have a guideline similar to AAFCO. The European Pet Food Federation (FEDIAF) also stated a minimum of 18%.[65] AAFCO only provided a minimum, but majority of the diets found on the market contain a protein level exceeding the minimum. Some diets have a protein level lower than others (such as 18-20%). These low-protein diets would not be seen with growth and reproductive life stages because of their higher demand for protein, as such, these diets are for dogs meeting maintenance levels.[64] They can be purchased, such as vegetarian, vegan, weight control, and senior diets. Furthermore, this protein requirement varies from species to species. Disadvantages[edit] There is an increasing risk of the practice of coprophagy when providing low-protein diets to dogs; a negative correlation exists between the amount of protein fed and the occurrence of coprophagy.[66] Maintenance needs should still be met by low-protein diets, and the muscle turnover (i.e. synthesis and breakdown) will also remain at an optimal rate, as long as the amino acid intake remains balanced and there are no limiting amino acids.[66] There is a greater opportunity for amino acids to balance in diets containing more protein.[37] Advantages[edit] The dog's simple gastrointestinal tract contains a vast array of microbial populations; some members of this very diversified community include Fusobacteriota, Pseudomonadota, and Actinomycetota.[67] The gut microbiota of the dog will be comparable to that of the owners due to similar environmental impacts. Not only are the microbes influenced by the dog's environment, but they are also affected by the macronutrient content of the dog's diet.[67] The populations present and health status of the microbiota found within the gut can alter the physiological and metabolic functions of the dog, which then subsequently affects susceptibility to disease development.[67] Fermentation and digestion in the hindgut of a dog can potentially be improved depending on the source and the concentration of protein provide in a diet. Greater digestibility due to higher quality ingredients, in addition to lower protein concentrations within a diet, will help promote beneficial outcomes in assisting the health of a dog's gastrointestinal tract.[68] Higher protein entering the gut will lead to more putrefaction that give rise to various toxins including carcinogens and increase the chances of many bowel diseases, such as colorectal cancer.[69] The age of dogs and cats is inversely proportional to protein consumption.[70] As they age, the protein requirement decreases due to lower level of pepsin in their stomachs.[70] There has also been discussion about higher protein content in diets being inversely related with lifespan (i.e. negative relationship), where lower protein content diets were related to longer lifespans.[66] Hypoallergenic[edit] Dogs are prone to have adverse allergic reactions to food similar to human beings. The most common symptoms of food allergies in dogs include rashes, swelling, itchy or tender skin, and gastrointestinal upsets such as uncontrollable bowel movements and soft stools.[71] Certain ingredients in dog food can elicit these allergic reactions. Specifically, the reactions are understood to be initiated by the protein ingredients in dog food, with sources such as beef, chicken, soy, and turkey being common causes of these allergic reactions.[72][73] A number of "novel protein" dog foods are available that claim to alleviate such allergies in dogs.[74] Hypoallergenic diets for dogs with food allergies consist of either limited ingredients,[75] novel proteins,[72] or hydrolyzed proteins.[76] Limited ingredients make it possible to identify the suspected allergens causing these allergic reactions, as well as making it easy to avoid multiple ingredients if a canine is allergic to more than one.[75] In novel protein recipes, manufacturers use ingredients which are less likely to cause allergic reactions in dogs such as lamb, fish, and rice.[72] Hydrolyzed proteins do not come from a novel source; they could originate from chicken or soy for example. Hydrolyzed proteins become novel when they are broken apart into unrecognizable versions of themselves, making them novel to allergic gastrointestinal tracts.[76] Grain-free and low-carbohydrate[edit] Some dog food products differentiate themselves as grain- or carbohydrate-free to offer the consumer an alternative, claiming carbohydrates in pet foods to be fillers with little or no nutritional value. A study published in Nature suggests that domestic dogs' ability to easily metabolize carbohydrates may be a key difference between wolves and dogs.[77] Some consumers and manufacturers say dogs perform better on grain-free diets, while some veterinarians doubt this for a lack of scientific evidence.[78] In 2019, a study comparing dry dog food that was manufactured in the United States found that 75% of food containing feed grade grains also contained measurable levels of various mycotoxins (discussed below), while none of the grain-free dry diets tested had any detectable levels of mycotoxins. Feed grade (lower quality grade) grains that are allowed to spoil and become moldy are the suspected source of the mycotoxins.[79] This is the first published study to show a potential health benefit to feeding grain-free commercial dry pet foods. In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration identified 16 dog food brands linked to canine heart disease. The FDA has investigated more than 500 cases of dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs eating food marketed as grain-free. The 16 brands are: Acana, Zignature, Taste of the Wild, 4Health, Earthborn Holistic, Blue Buffalo, Nature's Domain, Fromm, Merrick, California Natural, Natural Balance, Orijen, Nature's Variety, NutriSource, Nutro, and Rachael Ray Nutrish. These brands are labeled as "grain-free" and list peas, lentils, or potatoes as the main ingredient. The top three brands associated with reports of cardiomyopathy are Acana with 67 reports, Zignature with 64, and Taste of the Wild with 53 reports.[80][81] Vegetarian and vegan[edit] Main article: Vegetarian and vegan dog diet Like the human practice of veganism, vegan dog foods are those formulated with the exclusion of ingredients that contain or were processed with any part of an animal, or any animal byproduct.[82] Research shows that dogs can remain healthy on a vegetarian diet.[83][84] The omnivorous domestic canine has evolved to metabolize carbohydrates and thrive on a diet lower in protein, and a vegan diet may be adequate if properly formulated and balanced.[84] Popularity of this diet has grown with a corresponding increase in people practicing vegetarianism and veganism as well as with growing concerns about environmental issues such as climate change or awareness of the large environmental impacts of animal agriculture.[83] Vegetarian dog foods are produced to either assuage a pet owner's ethical concerns or for animals with extreme allergies.[2][83] Due to the exclusion of animal products and by-products, which are primary ingredients of conventional dog food, many nutrients that would otherwise be provided by animal products need to be provided by replacement, plant-based ingredients.[84] While both animal and plant products offer a wide range of macro and micronutrients, strategic formulation of plant ingredients should be considered to meet nutritional requirements, as different nutrients are more abundant in different plant sources.[85] Despite the large differences in ingredient sourcing, studies have demonstrated that a plant-based diet can be just as edible and palatable as animal-based diets for dogs.[85] There are now various commercial vegetarian and vegan diets available on the market.[84] Special considerations Some nutrients that require special consideration include protein, calcium, vitamin D, vitamin B12, taurine, L-carnitine, and omega-3 fatty acids, particularly DHA and EPA. Although their sources are more limited without animal products, it is possible to formulate a diet adequate in these nutrients through plant and synthetic sources.[85] A review recommends a cautious approach to vegan dog food given "the lack of large population-based studies" as of 2023 and that commercial foods are used if guardians wish to implement a vegan diet.[83] Potential risks in feeding a plant-based diet include alkaline urine and nutrient inadequacy, especially in homemade diets.[86][85] Adherence to recommendations by reliable sources is strongly advised. Nutrients and supplements[edit] See also: Cat food § Nutrients and supplements The requirements and functions of nutrients in dogs are largely similar to those in cats, with many requirements relaxed: The requirement of arginine in the urea cycle is reduced, as dogs have a functional pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase.[87] Dogs have a functional delta 6 desaturase, hence no specific need for arachidonic acid.[60] Dogs have a functional sulfinoalanine decarboxylase, hence no need for taurine.[88] Unlike cats, dogs and humans can use Vitamin D2 nearly as efficiently as they use Vitamin D3.[89] Chart[edit] This section may lack focus or may be about more than one topic. In particular, need to replace cat functions and symptoms with dog information. Please help improve this article, possibly by splitting the article and/or by introducing a disambiguation page, or discuss this issue on the talk page. (November 2020) Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) Dog Food Nutrient Profiles,[a] 2014[90] with Role of Vitamins & Minerals [91] Nutrient Units(DryMatter Basis) Growth andreproductionminimum Adultmaintenanceminimum[b] Maximum Functions Signs of deficiency/Excess Protein % 22.5 18.0 Arginine % 1.0 0.51 Deficiency Hyperammonemia Symptoms include lethargy, vomiting, ataxia, hyperesthesia and can be serious enough to induce death and coma[92] Histidine % 0.44 0.19 Isoleucine % 0.71 0.38 Leucine % 1.29 0.68 Lysine % 0.90 0.63 Methionine + cystine % 0.70 0.65 Methionine % 0.35 0.33 Phenylalanine + tyrosine % 1.30 0.74 Phenylalanine % 0.83 0.45 Threonine % 1.04 0.48 Tryptophan % 0.20 0.16 Valine % 0.68 0.49 Fat [c] % 8.5 5.5 Linoleic acid % 1.3 1.1 alpha-Linolenic acid % 0.08 ND EPA + DHA % 0.05 ND ω-6:ω-3 ratio 30:1 Minerals Calcium % 1.2 0.5 1.8 Formation of bones and teeth Blood coagulation Nerve impulse transmission Muscle contraction Cell signaling Deficiency Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism loss of bone mineral content, which can lead to collapse and curvature of lumbar vertebrae and pelvic bones bone pain, which can progress to pathological fractures Excess Depressed food intake Decreased growth Increased bone mineral density Increased need for magnesium Phosphorus % 1.0 0.4 1.6 Skeletal structure DNA and RNA structure Energy metabolism Locomotion Acid-base balance Deficiency Hemolytic anemia Locomotor disturbances Metabolic acidosis Ca:P ratio 1:1 1:1 2:1 Potassium % 0.6 0.6 Acid-base balance Nerve-impulse transmission Enzymatic reactions Transport functions Deficiency Anorexia Retarded growth Neurological disorders, including ataxia and severe muscle weakness Sodium % 0.3 0.08 Acid-base balance Regulation of osmotic pressure Nerve impulse generation and transmission Deficiency Anorexia Impaired growth Excessive thirst and drinking Excessive urination Chloride % 0.45 0.12 Acid-base balance Osmolarity of extracellular fluids Deficiency Increased sodium concentration in renal fluid Excess potassium excretion Magnesium % 0.06 0.06 Enzyme functions Muscle and nerve-cell membrane stability Hormone secretion and function Mineral structure of bones and teeth Deficiency Poor growth Overextension of the carpal joints Muscle twitching Convulsions Excess Urinary tract stone formation in the presence of high pH Iron [d] mg/kg 88 40 Hemoglobin and myoglobin synthesis Energy metabolism Deficiency Poor growth Pale mucous membranes Lethargy Weakness Diarrhea Excess Vomiting and diarrhea Copper [e] mg/kg 12.4 7.3 Connective tissue formation Iron metabolism Blood cell formation Melanin pigment formation Myelin formation Defense against oxidative damage Deficiency Reduced weight gain Longer time to conceive Manganese mg/kg 7.2 5.0 Enzyme functions Bone development Neurological function No studies of deficiency in cats Zinc mg/kg 100 80 1000 (removed in 2014)[93] Enzyme reactions Cell replication Protein and carbohydrate metabolism Skin function Wound healing Deficiency Skin lesions Growth retardation Testicular damage Iodine mg/kg 1.0 1.0 11 Thyroid hormone synthesis Cell differentiation Growth and development of puppies Regulation of metabolic rate Deficiency Enlargement of thyroid glands Excess Excessive tearing, salivation, and nasal discharge Dandruff Selenium mg/kg 0.35 0.35 2 Defense against oxidative damage Immune response No studies of deficiency in cats Vitamins Vitamin A IU/kg 5000 5000 250,000 Vision Growth Immune function Fetal development Cellular differentiation Transmembrane protein transfer Deficiency Conjunctivitis Cataracts, retinal degeneration, and other eye problems Weight loss Muscle weakness Reproductive and developmental disorders Excess Skeletal lesions in kittens, particularly outgrowths of the cervical vertebrae Osteoporosis Vitamin D IU/kg 500 500 3,000 Maintenance of mineral status Skeletal structure Muscle contraction Blood clotting Nerve conduction Cell signaling Phosphorus balance Deficiency Rickets Abnormalities in skeletal development Progressive paralysis Ataxia Lack of grooming Reduction in body weight and food intake Excess Anorexia Vomiting Lethargy Calcification of soft tissues Vitamin E [f] IU/kg 50 50 Defense against oxidative damage via free radical scavenging Deficiency Anorexia Depression Pain sensitivity in abdomen Fat tissue pathology Vitamin B1 / Thiamine [g] mg/kg 2.25 2.25 Energy and carbohydrate metabolism Activation of ion channels in neural tissue Deficiency Neurological impairments including altered reflexes and convulsive seizures Heart-rate disorders Pathological changes in the central nervous system Severe learning deficits Riboflavin mg/kg 5.2 5.2 Enzyme functions Deficiency Cataracts Fatty livers Testicular atrophy Pantothenic acid mg/kg 12 12 Energy metabolism Deficiency Stunted growth Fatty changes in liver Small bowel lesions Niacin mg/kg 13.6 13.6 Enzyme functions Deficiency Anorexia Weight loss Elevated body temperature Fiery red tongue, with ulceration and congestion Vitamin B6 / Pyridoxine mg/kg 1.5 1.5 Glucose generation Red blood cell function Niacin synthesis Nervous system function Immune response Hormone regulation Gene activation Deficiency Stunted growth Convulsive seizures Kidney lesions Folic Acid mg/kg 0.216 0.216 Amino acid and nucleotide metabolism Mitochondrial protein synthesis Deficiency Decreased growth rate increased iron levels in blood Vitamin B12 mg/kg 0.028 0.028 Enzyme functions Deficiency Weight loss Vomiting Diarrhea Intestinal disorders Choline mg/kg 1360 1360 Deficiency Fatty liver in kittens[94] Lower motivation to eat in kittens[94] Decreased growth rate in kittens[94] ^ Presumes an energy density of 4.0 kcal/g ME, based on the modified Atwater values of 3.5, 8.5, and 3.5 kcal/g for protein, fat, and carbohydrate (nitrogen-free extract, NFE), respectively [Regulation PF9]. Rations greater than 4.5 kcal/g should be corrected for energy density; rations less than 4.0 kcal/g should not be corrected for energy. ^ Recommended concentrations for maintenance of body weight at an average caloric intake for dogs of a given optimal weight. ^ Although a true requirement for fat per se has not been established, the minimum level was based on recognition of fat as a source of essential fatty acids, as a carrier of fat-soluble vitamins, to enhance palatability, and to supply an adequate caloric density. ^ Average apparent digestibility for iron associated with recommended minimums is 20% of that consumed. Because of very poor bioavailability, iron from carbonate or oxide sources that are added to the diet should not be considered as components in meeting the minimum nutrient level. ^ Because of very poor bioavailability, copper from oxide sources that are added to the diet should not be considered as components in meeting the minimum nutrient level. ^ It is recommended that the ratio of IU of vitamin E to grams of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) be >0.6:1. A diet containing 50 IU of vitamin E will have a ratio of >0.6:1 when the PUFA content is 83 grams or less. Diets containing more than 83 grams of PUFA should contain an additional 0.6 IU of vitamin E for every gram of PUFA. ^ Because processing may destroy up to 90% of the thiamine in the diet, allowance in formulation should be made to ensure the minimum nutrient level is met after processing. The European Union does not use a unified nutrient requirement.[95] A manufacturer committee called FEDIAF (European Pet Food Industry Federation) makes recommendations for cats and dogs that members follow.[96] Both AAFCO and FEDIAF publish in two formats: one in the amount-per-kilogram form above, another in an energy-ratio format.[90] Dangers[edit] Main article: Dog health § Dangerous foods A number of common human foods and household ingestibles are toxic to dogs, including chocolate solids (theobromine poisoning), onion and garlic (thiosulfate, alliin or allyl propyl disulfide poisoning[97]), grapes and raisins (cause kidney failure in dogs), milk (some dogs are lactose intolerant and suffer diarrhea; goats' milk can be beneficial to dogs), mushrooms, fatty foods, rhubarb, xylitol,[98] macadamia nuts, as well as various plants and other potentially ingested materials.[99][100] A full list of poison/toxic substances can be found on the ASPCA's website.[101] Recalls[edit] Dog food at a supermarket in Brooklyn, New York. Main article: 2007 pet food recalls The 2007 pet food recalls involved the massive recall of many brands of cat and dog foods beginning in March 2007.[102] The recalls came in response to reports of renal failure in pets consuming mostly wet pet foods made with wheat gluten from a single Chinese company, beginning in February 2007. After more than three weeks of complaints from consumers, the recall began voluntarily with the Canadian company Menu Foods on March 16, 2007, when a company test showed sickness and death in some of the test animals. Overall, several major companies recalled more than 100 brands of pet foods, with most of the recalled product coming from Menu Foods. The contaminant was identified as melamine,[103][104][105][106][107] which had been added as an adulterant to simulate a higher protein content. In the United States, there has been extensive media coverage of the recall. There have been calls for government regulation of pet foods[by whom?], which had previously been self-regulated by pet food manufacturers. The economic impact on the pet food market has been extensive, with Menu Foods losing roughly $30 million alone from the recall. Contaminants[edit] Mycotoxins[edit] In April 2014, aflatoxin B1, a known carcinogenic toxin, melamine, and cyanuric acid were all found in various brands of USA pet food imported into Hong Kong. Since 1993, the FDA has confirmed concerns of toxins in feed grade (animal grade) ingredients, yet to date no comprehensive federal regulation exists on mycotoxin testing in feed grade (animal grade) ingredients used to make pet food.[108] In 1997, the Journal of Food Additives and Contaminants established that low levels of various mycotoxins could cause health concerns in pets, and was found in feed grade ingredients.[109] A study published in the Journal of Food Protection in 2001 cited concerns regarding fungi (the source of mycotoxins) in commercial pet foods and warned about the "risk for animal health".[110] In 2006, a study published in the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry confirmed mycotoxins in pet foods around the world and concluded that contamination of mycotoxins in pet foods can lead to chronic effects on the health of pets.[111] In 2007, the International Journal of Food Microbiology published a study that claimed "mycotoxin contamination in pet food poses a serious health threat to pets", and listed them: aflatoxins, ochratoxins, trichothecenes, zearalenone, fumonisins and fusaric acid.[112] A 2008 study published in the Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition found high levels of mycotoxins in the raw ingredients used for pet food in Brazil.[113] A 2010 study in the Journal of Mycotoxin Research tested 26 commercial dog foods and found mycotoxins at concerning sub-lethal levels. It was determined that long-term exposure to low levels of confirmed mycotoxins could pose chronic health risks.[114] For all the above reasons, a trend away from feed ingredients and toward USDA-certified ingredients fit for human consumption has developed.[115] In 1999, another fungal toxin triggered the recall of dry dog food made by Doane Pet Care at one of its plants, including Ol' Roy, Wal-Mart's brand, as well as 53 other brands. This time the toxin killed 25 dogs.[116] A 2005 consumer alert was released for contaminated Diamond Pet Foods for dogs and cats. Over 100 canine deaths and at least one feline fatality have been linked to Diamond Pet Foods contaminated by potentially deadly aflatoxin, according to Cornell University veterinarians.[117] Salmonella and copper[edit] The FDA released a video focusing on another major threat in commercial pet food: Salmonella bacterial contamination. They also cite other major toxins of concern.[118] The video references the case of a specific commercial pet food plant that was also the subject of a March 2014 study published in the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. It details how at least 53 known human illnesses were linked to commercial pet foods made at that plant in 2012.[119] A class action lawsuit linked to this outbreak was settled in 2014.[120] The video also cites the dangers of over supplementation of nutrients in pet food. A study published in the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association in February 2013 suggested a correlation between liver disease and the amount of copper supplementation in AAFCO diets.[121] In popular culture[edit] Eating your own dog food or dogfooding is the practice of using your own products or services.[122][123][124] See also[edit] Cat food Dental health diets for dogs Dog food brands Dog biscuits Dog meat Dog odor Hypoallergenic dog food Pet store Puppy nutrition Senior dog diet References[edit] ^ a b Axelsson, E.; Ratnakumar, A.; Arendt, M.L.; Maqbool, K.; Webster, M.T.; Perloski, M.; Liberg, O.; Arnemo, J.M.; Hedhammar, Å.; Lindblad-Toh, K. (2013). "The genomic signature of dog domestication reveals adaptation to a starch-rich diet". Nature. 495 (7441): 360–364. Bibcode:2013Natur.495..360A. doi:10.1038/nature11837. PMID 23354050. S2CID 4415412. ^ a b Arendt, M; Cairns, K M; Ballard, J W O; Savolainen, P; Axelsson, E (13 July 2016). "Diet adaptation in dog reflects spread of prehistoric agriculture". Heredity. 117 (5): 301–306. doi:10.1038/hdy.2016.48. PMC 5061917. PMID 27406651. ^ Pajic, Petar; Pavlidis, Pavlos; Dean, Kirsten; Neznanova, Lubov; Romano, Rose-Anne; Garneau, Danielle; Daugherity, Erin; Globig, Anja; Ruhl, Stefan; Gokcumen, Omer (14 May 2019). "Independent amylase gene copy number bursts correlate with dietary preferences in mammals". eLife. 8. doi:10.7554/eLife.44628. PMC 6516957. PMID 31084707. Mareike C Janiak (May 14, 2019). "Evolution: Of starch and spit". eLife. ^ "Did Eating Human Poop Play a Role in the Evolution of Dogs? | Psychology Today". ^ Song, Hee Seok; Kim, Young Ae (March 2021). "A dog food recommendation system based on nutrient suitability". Expert Systems. 38 (2). doi:10.1111/exsy.12623. ISSN 0266-4720. S2CID 225422919. ^ "Dog Food in the US". Euromonitor.com. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. ^ Virgil (6 December 2017). "Bucolica, Georgica, et Aeneis: accedunt clavis metrica, notulae Anglicae, et quaestiones". Hilliard, Gray, Little et Wilkins. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ "Columella: de Re Rustica VII". Thelatinlibrary.com. Archived from the original on 2015-04-26. Retrieved 2015-03-16. ^ Darmesteter, James; Mills, Lawrence Heyworth (6 December 1895). "The Zend-Avesta: The Vendîdâd, translated by James Darmesteter". Clarendon Press. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 16 March 2015 – via Google Books. ^ de), Fr Girard (Viuda (6 December 2017). "Nouveau dictionnaire universel des arts et des sciencies: françois, latin et anglois..." chez la Veuve de Fr. Girard. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ "Denis Diderot, Jean Le Rond d' Alembert, Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences ..., Volume 35, Part 1". 1781. Retrieved 2016-10-21. ^ Boyard, Nicolas Jean Baptiste (1844). "Nicolas Jean Baptiste Boyard, Manuel du bouvier et zoophile: ou l'art d'élever de soigner les animaux 1844, 327". Archived from the original on 2020-08-19. Retrieved 2018-10-02. ^ "The Sportsman's Dictionary; Or, The Gentleman's Companion: for Town and Country: Containing Full and Particular Instructions for Riding, Hunting, Fowling ... Hawking, &c. With the Various Methods to be Observed in Breeding and Dieting of Horses Both for the Road and Turf; Also, the Management of Dogs, Gamecocks, Dunghill-fowls, Turkies, Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, Singing-birds, &c. And the Manner of Curing Their Various Diseases and Accidents". G.G.J. and J. Robinson. 6 December 1785. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ Lawrence, Richard (6 December 2017). "The Complete Farrier, and British Sportsman: Containing a Systematic Enquiry Into the Structure and Animal Economy of the Horse, the Causes, Symptoms, and Most-approved Methods of Prevention and Cure for Every Disease to which He is Liable ... with Numerous ... Recipes for Various Diseases. ... Including a ... Declineation of the ... Dogs Used in the Sports of the Field, with Canine Pathology. With an Appendix, Containing a Minute Anatomical Description of the ... Skeleton of the Horse; the ... Muscles ... and the Different Viscera". W. Clowes for T. Kelly. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ "The Best Dog Food for Small Dogs". allsmalldogs.org. December 21, 2013. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2016. ^ "Outing: Sport, Adventure, Travel, Fiction". W. B. Holland. 6 December 1890. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019 – via Google Books. ^ Forrest, Susanna (8 June 2017). "The Troubled History of Horse Meat in America". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 15 March 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2020. ^ "History of Pet Food". sojos.com. Archived from the original on 2011-08-29. Retrieved 2011-09-10. ^ Galera, Leonardo de Aro; Abdalla Filho, Adibe Luiz; Reis, Luiza Santos; Souza, Janaina Leite de; Hernandez, Yeleine Almoza; Martinelli, Luiz Antonio (2019). "Carbon and nitrogen isotopic composition of commercial dog food in Brazil". PeerJ. 7: e5828. doi:10.7717/peerj.5828. PMC 6387582. PMID 30809425. ^ a b "Pet Foods - Diet Types | PetDiets". www.petdiets.com. Archived from the original on 2019-11-17. Retrieved 2019-11-17. ^ MacNamara, John P. Principles of Companion Animal Nutrition. 2006. New Jersey: Pearson/Prentice Hall. ^ Elsey, J.; Riepenhausen, J.; McKay, B.; Barton, G.W.; Willis, M. (1997). "Modeling and Control of a Food Extrusion Process". Computers Chem Engng. 21 (1–2): S361–S366. doi:10.1016/s0098-1354(97)00075-6. ^ Pitchon, E. (1980). United States Patent No. 4225630. Flushing, New York:United States Patent Office. ^ Fascetti, Andrea (October 2003). "Taurine deficiency in dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 223 (8): 1137–1141. doi:10.2460/javma.2003.223.1137. PMID 14584743. ^ Pion, Paul (1992). "Dilated Cardiomyopathy Associated with Taurine Deficiency in the Domestic Cat: Relationship to Diet and Myocardial Taurine Content". Taurine. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology. Vol. 315. pp. 63–73. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-3436-5_8. ISBN 978-1-4613-6520-4. PMID 1387282. ^ Spitze, AR (2003). "Taurine concentrations in animla feed ingredients; cooking influences taurine content" (PDF). Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition. 87 (7–8): 251–262. doi:10.1046/j.1439-0396.2003.00434.x. PMID 12864905. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2014. ^ Messonnier, S. (2001) Natural Health Bible for Dogs & Cats. New York: Three Rivers Press. ISBN 0-7615-2673-0 ^ Bohart, G.S. (1934). United States Patent No. 1961681. Washington, D.C.:United States Patent Office. ^ a b c d e f g Baker, G.J., Bansal, A.K., Konieczka, J.L. and Kuntz, D.A. (1990). United States Patent No. 4895731. Chicago, Illinois: United States Patent Office. ^ Taylor, Jessica (2013-09-26). "How to: Apply human food trends to petfood". Petfoodindustry.com. Archived from the original on 2012-11-09. Retrieved 2014-08-10. ^ "Making Homemade dog food recipes". Archived from the original on 2013-05-11. Retrieved 2013-03-27. ^ "The Dog Food Project - Ingredients to avoid". Dogfoodproject.com. Archived from the original on 2009-01-16. Retrieved 2009-01-31. ^ "The Pet Food Ingredient Game - Wysong". Wysong.net. Archived from the original on 2012-08-23. Retrieved 2012-08-13. ^ "An excerpt from the book "Food Pets Die For"". Homevet.com. Archived from the original on 2007-06-21. Retrieved 2007-10-25. ^ the Association of American Feed Control Officials Archived January 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Canada Wraps Up BSE Investigation Archived November 27, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d Case, Linda P (2011). Canine and feline nutrition: a resource for companion animal professionals. Maryland Heights, Mo.: Mosby. ISBN 9780323066198. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-12-05. ^ Hilton, J.W.; Atkinson, J.L. (January 1988). "High Lipid and High Protein Dog Foods". The Canadian Veterinary Journal. 29 (1): 76–78. ISSN 0008-5286. PMC 1680747. PMID 17422957. ^ Dehkordi, N.; Rao, R.; Sakhanokho, H.; Zipf, A. (2003). "Nutrient Intake in Adults 50 Years Age and Older in the United States". Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 103: 26. doi:10.1016/S0002-8223(08)70041-5. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-29. ^ Sepowitz, John J.; McClung, Holly L.; Berryman, Claire E.; Armstrong, Nicholes J.; Ferrando, Arny A.; Lieberman, Harris R.; McClung, James P.; Pasiakos, Stefan M. (May 2016). "Supplementing An Energy Adequate High Protein Diet With Additional Protein Is Not Necessary For Recovery Of Lean Body Mass After Short-term Starvation: 1609 Board #262 June 2, 800 AM - 930 AM". Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. 48 (5S): 443. doi:10.1249/01.mss.0000486334.23548.c5. ISSN 0195-9131. S2CID 2730636. ^ Peterson, Mark D.; Sen, Ananda; Gordon, Paul M. (February 2011). "Influence of resistance exercise on lean body mass in aging adults: a meta-analysis". Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 43 (2): 249–258. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181eb6265. ISSN 1530-0315. PMC 2995836. PMID 20543750. ^ Federal Drug Administration. (2018, March 23). "Complete and Balanced" Pet Food. Retrieved May 31, 2018, from https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/animal-health-literacy/complete-and-balanced-pet-food ^ "Alternative Feeding Practices". World Small Animal Veterinary Association. 2001. Archived from the original on 2008-02-12. Retrieved 2008-02-24. ^ DACVN, Cailin R. Heinze, VMD, MS; DACVN, Cailin R. Heinze, VMD, MS (2019-02-15). "Human Grade: Should pets eat the same food that we do?". Clinical Nutrition Service at Cummings School. Archived from the original on 2019-11-18. Retrieved 2019-11-18.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Medicine, Center for Veterinary (2019-04-15). "Information on Marketing a Pet Food Product". FDA. Archived from the original on 2019-12-12. Retrieved 2019-12-16. ^ a b Schlesinger, Daniel P.; Joffe, Daniel J. (2011). "Raw food diets in companion animals: A critical review". The Canadian Veterinary Journal. 52 (1): 50–54. ISSN 0008-5286. PMC 3003575. PMID 21461207. ^ Harper, Amelie (2011-06-11). "Raw Feeding Dogs – Handling Raw Dog Food At Home". Raw feeding. Archived from the original on 2020-09-18. Retrieved 2017-03-24. ^ "Worried about tainted jerky treats?". Orange County Register. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 16 April 2014. ^ Taylor, Jessica (2013-09-26). "Just Food for thought". Petfoodindustry.com. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2014-08-10. ^ "High-Pressure Processing and Raw Pet Food Diets: What You Need to Know". Petmd.com. Archived from the original on 2017-11-24. Retrieved 2017-11-27. ^ a b Michel, Kathryn E. (2006). "Unconventional Diets for Dogs and Cats". Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice. 36 (6): 1269–1281. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2006.08.003. PMID 17085234. ^ Laflamme, Dorthy (May 2005). "Nutrition for Aging Cats and Dogs and the Importance of Body Condition". Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice. 35 (3): 713–742. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2004.12.011. PMID 15833567. ^ Churchill, J.A. (2015). "Nutrition for senior dogs: New tricks for feeding old dogs" (PDF). Clinicians Brief. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-10-10. Retrieved 2017-11-28. ^ Neil, Kirsten M.; Caron, John P.; Orth, Michael W. (2005). "The role of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate in treatment for and prevention of osteoarthritis in animals". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 226 (7): 1079–1088. doi:10.2460/javma.2005.226.1079. PMID 15825732. ^ Case, Linda P.; et al. (2011). Canine and feline nutrition: a resource for companion animal professionals (3rd ed.). Maryland Heights, Mo.: Mosby. ISBN 9780323066198. OCLC 664112342. ^ Adolphe, Jennifer; Fitzpatrick, Kelley. "FLAXSEED: Nutrition Benefits for Dogs and Cats" (PDF). Flax Council of Canada. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-11-01. Retrieved 2017-11-28. ^ Swanson KS, Grieshop CM, Flickinger EA, Bauer LL, Healy HP, Dawson KA, Merchen NR, Fahey GG Jr (May 2002). "Supplemental fructooligosaccharides and mannanoligosaccharides influence immune function, ileal and total tract nutrient digestibilities, microbial populations and concentrations of protein catabolites in the large bowel of dogs". The Journal of Nutrition. 132 (5): 980–989. doi:10.1093/jn/132.5.980. PMID 11983825. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-28. ^ a b c Roudebush, Philip; Zicker, Steven C.; Cotman, Carl W.; Milgram, Norton W.; Muggenburg, Bruce A.; Head, Elizabeth (2005-09-01). "Nutritional management of brain aging in dogs". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 227 (5): 722–728. doi:10.2460/javma.2005.227.722. ISSN 0003-1488. PMID 16178393. ^ Straus M (November 2012). "Plant oils: do you know which plant oils may help your dog, and which ones could cause problems?". Whole Dog Journal. 15: 16. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-29. ^ a b Watson, Tim D. G. (1998-12-01). "Diet and Skin Disease in Dogs and Cats". The Journal of Nutrition. 128 (12): 2783S–2789S. doi:10.1093/jn/128.12.2783S. ISSN 0022-3166. PMID 9868266. ^ "Common pet food ingredients" (PDF). Skaer Veterinary. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-04-18. Retrieved 2017-11-29. ^ a b Wander RC, Hall JA, Gradin JL, Shi-Hua D, Jewell DE (June 1997). "The ratio of dietary (n-6) to (n-3) fatty acids influences immune system function, eicosanoid metabolism, Lipid peroxidation and vitamin E status in aged dogs". The Journal of Nutrition. 127 (6): 1198–1205. doi:10.1093/jn/127.6.1198. PMID 9187636. Archived from the original on 2021-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-29. ^ Kau, Andrew L.; Ahern, Philip P.; Griffin, Nicholas W.; Goodman, Andrew L.; Gordon, Jeffrey I. (2011-06-15). "Human nutrition, the gut microbiome and the immune system". Nature. 474 (7351): 327–336. doi:10.1038/nature10213. ISSN 1476-4687. PMC 3298082. PMID 21677749. ^ a b "The Association of American Feed Control Officials > Home". Aafco.org. Archived from the original on 2020-08-17. Retrieved 2017-12-05. ^ "Nutrition". Fediaf.org. Archived from the original on 2017-12-06. Retrieved 2017-12-05. ^ a b c J. France and E. Kebreab (2008). Mathematical Modelling in Animal Nutrition. Canada: CABI. ISBN 9781845933593. ^ a b c Swanson, K. S. (2016-10-01). "0226 Dietary manipulation of canine and feline gut microbiome". Journal of Animal Science. 94 (supplement5): 107. doi:10.2527/jam2016-0226. ISSN 1525-3163. Archived from the original on 2017-12-06. Retrieved 2017-12-05. ^ Nery, J.; Goudez, R.; Biourge, V.; Tournier, C.; Leray, V.; Martin, L.; Thorin, C.; Nguyen, P.; Dumon, H. (August 2012). "Influence of dietary protein content and source on colonic fermentative activity in dogs differing in body size and digestive tolerance" (PDF). Journal of Animal Science. 90 (8): 2570–2580. doi:10.2527/jas.2011-4112. hdl:2318/94132. ISSN 1525-3163. PMID 22328724. ^ Conlon, Michael A.; Bird, Anthony R. (2014-12-24). "The Impact of Diet and Lifestyle on Gut Microbiota and Human Health". Nutrients. 7 (1): 17–44. doi:10.3390/nu7010017. ISSN 2072-6643. PMC 4303825. PMID 25545101. ^ a b Fahey, George C.; Barry, Kathleen A.; Swanson, Kelly S. (2008). "Age-related changes in nutrient utilization by companion animals". Annual Review of Nutrition. 28: 425–445. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.28.061807.155325. ISSN 0199-9885. PMID 18598137. ^ Favrot, Claude (2016). "Diagnosis of canine atopic dermatitis (including food allergy)" (PDF). World Congress of Veterinary Dermatology. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-12-01. Retrieved 2017-11-30 – via ZORA. ^ a b c Kennis, Robert, A. (2006). "Food Allergies: Update of Pathogenesis, Diagnoses, and Management". Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice. 36 (1): 175–184. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2005.09.012. PMID 16364783.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Jensen-Jarolim, Erika (2017). Comparative Medicine: Disorders Linking Humans with their Animals. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. p. 121. ISBN 978-3-319-47007-8. ^ Dodds, W. Jean (2015). Canine Nutrigenomics: The New Science of Feeding Your Dog for Optimum Health. Dogwise Publishing. ^ a b Verlindin A, Hesta M, Millet S, Janssens GP (2007). "Food Allergy in Dogs and Cats: A review". Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 46 (3): 259–273. doi:10.1080/10408390591001117. PMID 16527756. S2CID 32026297. ^ a b Cave, Nicholas, J (2006). "Hydrolyzed Protein Diets for Dogs and Cats". Veterinary Clinics Small Animal Practice. 36 (6): 1251–1268. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2006.08.008. PMID 17085233.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Mestel, Rosie (2013-01-23). "Carbs were key in wolves' evolution into dogs". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 2013-06-29. Retrieved 2013-07-08. ^ "FDA names 16 brands of dog food linked to canine heart disease". NBC News. Archived from the original on 2019-11-18. Retrieved 2019-11-19. ^ Tegzes, John H.; Oakley, Brian B.; Brennan, Greg (January 2019). "Comparison of mycotoxin concentrations in grain versus grain-free dry and wet commercial dog foods". Toxicology Communications. 3 (1): 61–66. doi:10.1080/24734306.2019.1648636. ISSN 2473-4306. ^ "FDA Identifies 16 Dog Food Brands Linked to Canine Heart Disease". July 2019. Archived from the original on 2019-07-19. Retrieved 2019-07-19. ^ Garcia, Sandra E. (2019-06-29). "F.D.A. Names 16 Brands of Dog Food That May Be Linked to Canine Heart Disease (Published 2019)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2021-05-16. Retrieved 2021-03-03. ^ Ruby, Matthew B. (February 2012). "Vegetarianism. A blossoming field of study". Appetite. 58 (1): 141–150. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2011.09.019. ISSN 1095-8304. PMID 22001025. S2CID 30991920. ^ a b c d Domínguez-Oliva, Adriana; Mota-Rojas, Daniel; Semendric, Ines; Whittaker, Alexandra L. (January 2023). "The Impact of Vegan Diets on Indicators of Health in Dogs and Cats: A Systematic Review". Veterinary Sciences. 10 (1): 52. doi:10.3390/vetsci10010052. ISSN 2306-7381. PMC 9860667. PMID 36669053. ^ a b c d Knight, Andrew; Leitsberger, Madelaine (2016-09-21). "Vegetarian versus Meat-Based Diets for Companion Animals". Animals. 6 (9): 57. doi:10.3390/ani6090057. PMC 5035952. PMID 27657139. ^ a b c d McEvoy, Claire T.; Temple, Norman; Woodside, Jayne V. (December 2012). "Vegetarian diets, low-meat diets and health: a review". Public Health Nutrition. 15 (12): 2287–2294. doi:10.1017/S1368980012000936. ISSN 1368-9800. PMC 10271837. PMID 22717188. ^ Kienzle, E.; Engelhard, R. (2001). "A field study on the nutrition of vegetarian dogs and cats in Europe". Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practising Veterinarian. 23 (9A): 81. ^ Rogers, QR; Phang, JM (1985). "Deficiency of pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase in the intestinal mucosa of the cat". J Nutr. 115 (1): 146–50. doi:10.1093/jn/115.1.146. PMID 3965666. ^ KNOPF, Karen (2011). "Taurine: An Essential Nutrient for the Cat". The Journal of Nutrition. 108 (5): 773–778. doi:10.1093/jn/108.5.773. PMID 641594 – via Primo. ^ Morris, J. G. (August 2002). "Cats discriminate between cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol*". Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition. 86 (7–8): 229–238. doi:10.1046/j.1439-0396.2002.00379.x. PMID 15379909. ^ a b "AAFCO methods for substantiating nutritional adequacy of dog and cat foods (proposed for 2014 publication)" (PDF). AAFCO. 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-10-22. Retrieved 2020-11-30. ^ The Role of Vitamins and Minerals in the Diet for Cats. 2006. doi:10.17226/10668. ISBN 978-0-309-08628-8. Archived from the original on 2006-09-07. Retrieved 2007-03-08. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) Note: A dog chapter should be available. If any editor is able to access the book, please adjust the article accordingly. ^ Bauer, J. E. (January 1998). "Nutritional Uniqueness of Cats". Veterinary Quarterly. 20 (sup1): S78–S79. doi:10.1080/01652176.1998.10807428. PMID 9652024. ^ David A. Dzanis (November 1997). "SELECTING NUTRITIOUS PET FOODS". INFORMATION FOR CONSUMERS. Food and Drug Administration - Center for Veterinary Medicine. Archived from the original on June 25, 2006. Retrieved 2005-01-20. ^ a b c Schaeffer, Rogers; Morris (1982). "The choline requirement of the growing kitten in the presence of just adequate dietary methionine". Nutrition Research. 2 (3): 289–299. doi:10.1016/s0271-5317(82)80010-9. ^ Global Alliance of Pet Food Associations. "How pet food is regulated" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-07-27. Retrieved 2020-11-30. ^ "Nutritional Guidelines". FEDIAF. Archived from the original on 2020-11-30. Retrieved 2020-11-30. ^ Sources vary on which of these are considered the most significant toxic item. ^ [1] Archived 2016-06-19 at the Wayback Machine, Toxic Food Guide for Pets ^ "Toxic Foods and Plants for Dogs". entirelypets.com. Archived from the original on 2010-07-23. Retrieved 2010-06-24. ^ Drs. Foster & Smith. "Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Dog". peteducation.com. Archived from the original on 2014-09-15. Retrieved 2010-06-24. ^ "People Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Pets". Aspca.org. Archived from the original on 2013-07-15. Retrieved 2017-09-20. ^ "FDA Animal Safety Recalls". FDA. 2018-11-03. Archived from the original on 2019-04-24. Retrieved 2019-12-16. ^ Cianciolo RE, Bischoff K, Ebel JG, Van Winkle TJ, Goldstein RE, Serfilippi LM (September 2008). "Clinicopathologic, histologic, and toxicologic findings in 70 cats inadvertently exposed to pet food contaminated with melamine and cyanuric acid". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 233 (5): 729–37. doi:10.2460/javma.233.5.729. PMID 18764706. ^ Thompson ME, Lewin-Smith MR, Kalasinsky VF, et al. (May 2008). "Characterization of melamine-containing and calcium oxalate crystals in three dogs with suspected pet food-induced nephrotoxicosis". Veterinary Pathology. 45 (3): 417–26. doi:10.1354/vp.45-3-417. PMID 18487505. S2CID 41007011. ^ Dobson RL, Motlagh S, Quijano M, et al. (November 2008). "Identification and characterization of toxicity of contaminants in pet food leading to an outbreak of renal toxicity in cats and dogs". Toxicological Sciences. 106 (1): 251–62. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfn160. PMID 18689873. ^ Rumbeiha WK, Agnew D, Maxie G, et al. (June 2010). "Analysis of a survey database of pet food-induced poisoning in North America". Journal of Medical Toxicology. 6 (2): 172–184. doi:10.1007/s13181-010-0022-9. PMC 3550281. PMID 20393823. ^ Cocchi M, Vascellari M, Gallina A, Agnoletti F, Angeletti R, Mutinelli F (January 2010). "Canine nephrotoxicosis induced by melamine-contaminated pet food in Italy". The Journal of Veterinary Medical Science. 72 (1): 103–7. doi:10.1292/jvms.09-0278. PMID 19915330. ^ Price WD, Lovell RA, McChesney DG (September 1993). "Naturally occurring toxins in feedstuffs: Center for Veterinary Medicine Perspective". Journal of Animal Science. 71 (9): 2556–62. doi:10.2527/1993.7192556x. PMID 8407668. ^ Scudamore KA, Hetmanski MT, Nawaz S, Naylor J, Rainbird S (1997). "Determination of mycotoxins in pet foods sold for domestic pets and wild birds using linked-column immunoassay clean-up and HPLC". Food Additives and Contaminants. 14 (2): 175–86. doi:10.1080/02652039709374512. PMID 9102350. ^ Bueno DJ, Silva JO, Oliver G (May 2001). "Mycoflora in commercial pet foods". Journal of Food Protection. 64 (5): 741–3. doi:10.4315/0362-028X-64.5.741. PMID 11348013. ^ Leung MC, Díaz-Llano G, Smith TK (December 2006). "Mycotoxins in pet food: a review on worldwide prevalence and preventative strategies". Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 54 (26): 9623–35. doi:10.1021/jf062363+. PMID 17177480. ^ Boermans HJ, Leung MC (October 2007). "Mycotoxins and the pet food industry: toxicological evidence and risk assessment". International Journal of Food Microbiology. 119 (1–2): 95–102. doi:10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2007.07.063. PMID 17889389. ^ Campos SG, Cavaglieri LR, Fernández Juri MG, et al. (June 2008). "Mycobiota and aflatoxins in raw materials and pet food in Brazil". Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition. 92 (3): 377–83. doi:10.1111/j.1439-0396.2008.00809.x. PMID 18477320. ^ Böhm J, Koinig L, Razzazi-Fazeli E, et al. (August 2010). "Survey and risk assessment of the mycotoxins deoxynivalenol, zearalenone, fumonisins, ochratoxin A, and aflatoxins in commercial dry dog food". Mycotoxin Research. 26 (3): 147–53. doi:10.1007/s12550-010-0049-4. PMID 23605379. S2CID 21833929. ^ DELL, MARYANNE (October 27, 2013). "Worried about tainted jerky treats? Here's how to keep your pets safe". Orange County Register. Archived from the original on April 17, 2014. Retrieved April 16, 2014. ^ "Animal Protection Institute (API)". Archived from the original on 2008-10-17. ^ "The Cornell Vet College". Archived from the original on 2007-04-09. Retrieved 2007-04-18. ^ "FDA Video Pet Food Safety". February 2014. Archived from the original on 2014-03-02. Retrieved 2014-04-16. ^ Imanishi M, Rotstein DS, Reimschuessel R, et al. (March 2014). "Outbreak of Salmonella enterica serotype Infantis infection in humans linked to dry dog food in the United States and Canada, 2012". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 244 (5): 545–53. doi:10.2460/javma.244.5.545. PMID 24548229. ^ "Diamond Pet Foods Agrees to Class Action Settlement". Archived from the original on 2014-04-06. Retrieved 2014-04-16. ^ Johnston, Andrea (February 1, 2013). "DVM". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 242 (3): 372–380. doi:10.2460/javma.242.3.372. PMID 23327181. ^ Helft, Miguel (12 December 2009). "Google Appears Closer to Releasing Its Own Phone". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 12 December 2009. On Saturday morning, Google confirmed that it was testing a new concept in mobile phones, writing in a blog post that it was 'dogfooding' the devices, an expression that comes from the idea that companies should "eat their own dog food", or use their own products. ^ "Microsoft tests its own 'dog food'". Tech News on ZDNet. Archived from the original on 21 June 2008. Retrieved 14 November 2009. ^ Dvorak, John C. (15 November 2007). "The Problem with Eating Your Own Dog Food". PC Magazine. Archived from the original on 28 June 2009. Retrieved 17 May 2010. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dog food. Interpreting pet food labels – Pet food labeling according to AAFCO regulations National Research Council (U.S.). Subcommittee on Dog Nutrition (1974). Nutrient requirements of dogs. National Academy of Sciences. ISBN 978-0-309-02315-3. vteDogsTypes African village dogs Feral dogs Pye-dogs Street dogs Hairless dogs Herding dogs Collies Livestock guardian dogs Sheepdogs Hunting dogs Curs Feists Lurchers Gun dogs Pointers Retrievers Setters Spaniels Water dogs Hounds Scenthounds Bassets Coonhounds Foxhounds Sighthounds Longdogs Terriers Bull-type terriers Pinschers Schnauzers Mastiffs Bulldogs Spitz Huskies Laikas Tugous Toy dogs Bichons Turnspit dogs Breeds List of breeds List of crossbreeds Mixed-breed dogs Crossbreeds Extinct breeds Most popular Roles Assistance dogs Autism dogs Guide dogs Hearing dogs Medical response dogs Seizure dogs Mobility assistance dogs Therapy dogs Psychiatric service dogs Attack dogs Bay dogs Carriage dogs Catch dogs Companion dogs Detection dogs Fighting dogs Guard dogs Lap dogs Meat dogs Mercy dogs Pet dogs Police dogs Search and rescue dogs Sled dogs War dogs Behavior Communication Barking Howling Human–canine bond Intelligence Dog–cat relationship Human–doginteraction Animal testing Baiting Breed-specific legislation Dog bite Dog fighting Dog park Dog show Human–canine bond Dog sports Dog walking Dog daycare Dog grooming Therapy Fear of dogs Dog licence Dog meat Dog food dog biscuit 2007 recalls Dogs in religion Dogs in space Origin of the domestic dog Health Aging (Longest living individual dogs) Anatomy Breeding Coat Conformation Diseases Dog food Odor Rabies in animals Rage syndrome Reproduction Skin disorders Vaccination Training Clicker Crate training Training Housebreaking Socialization Related List of individual dogs List of fictional dogs Category Portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dog_food&oldid=1178380365" Categories: Pet foodsDog nutritionHidden categories: CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertaintyWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: multiple names: authors listCS1 errors: periodical ignoredArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles with limited geographic scope from November 2022United States-centricWikipedia articles lacking focus from November 2020All Wikipedia articles lacking focusArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2018Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 October 2023, at 08:48 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement Toggle limited content width 

Skip to main content VMD 513: Pet animal Breeding, Management, Nutrition and Health Care (1+1) You are currently using guest access (Log in) Page pathHome / ► Courses / ► Existing Courses / ► UG Courses - Veterinary & Animal Husbandry / ► Veterinary Sciences / ► V Year / ► IX Semester- Veterinary Science / ► Pet animal Breeding and Management / ► Topic 4 / ► Feeding behaviour of dogs Feeding behaviour of dogs FEEDING BEHAVIOUR OF DOGS Due to cooperative hunting behaviour, the dog’s ancestors (wolf) can prey on large prey species and they eat the hunt as quick as possible. The same behaviour still present in domestic dog species which leads to rapid eating of their food. The tendency to eat rapidly can be a problem for some dogs because it may predispose them to choke or swallow large amounts of air. Dog while feeding with other dogs or other livestock species tends to eat more rapidly. Changing the food less palatable or make the food difficult to eat rapidly (semi moist food are consumed more quickly than dry food) or large pieces of food are possible approaches to slow down the feeding in dogs. Adding water to the dog’s food immediately before feeding decreases the rate of eating and minimizes the chance of swallowing large amounts of air. Other approaches include adding a large ball to the bowl or purchasing a feeding bowl that includes a center hub that functions to slow eating rate. Many dogs readily consume garbage, carrion, insects, and feces that they encounter in the yard or while out walking. Plant eating, in particular grass eating, is also frequently reported by owners. Contrary to popular beliefs, there is no evidence that grass/plant eating in dogs is a sign either of illness or nutrient deficiency. Rather, grass eating appears to be a normal Candi behavior as it is widespread among wolves and has not been shown to be associated with gastrointestinal upset or the onset of vomiting. It has been suggested that plant eating in canid and felid species may play a role similar to that described in chimpanzees, who consume entire leaves from various plants, which then function to purge intestinal parasites as they travel through the gastrointestinal tract. It is possible that plant eating evolved in dogs and cats to serve the same function. Although scavenging garbage and coprophagy are considered to be normal behaviors in dogs, these behaviors can present a health and sanitation risk and generally should be prevented. Keeping the yard picked up, using supervision, and teaching dogs a reliable “leave it” command are the best approaches to controlling scavenging and stool-eating behaviors. The dog’s ancestry suggests that an intermittent feeding schedule consisting of large meals interrupted by periods of fasting is the most natural way to feed dogs. However, when dogs are given free access to food, they will consume many small meals frequently throughout the day. This pattern is similar to that seen in cats, with the exception that dogs tend to eat only during the day time. The domestic dog is quite capable of adapting to a number of different feeding regimens. These regimens include portion-controlled feeding, time-controlled feeding, or free-choice (ad libitum) feeding. Last modified: Thursday, 7 June 2012, 11:27 AM Skip NavigationNavigationHomeSite pagesTags Calendar Site news Current coursePet animal Breeding and ManagementParticipants General Topic 1 Topic 2 Topic 3 Topic 4Learning objectives Feeding behaviour of dogs Feeding Feeding schedule - home made food Feed requirement chart Principles of feeding dog Energy requirement for dog Protein requirement for dog Fat requirement in the diet of dog Requirement of essential nutritive ingredients in ... Feeding management of newborn puppies Nutritional care of orphan puppies Feeding management during growing stage Feeding management during pregnancy and lactation Feeding management for adult maintenance PODCAST Quiz Learning objectives Feeding behaviour of dogs Feeding Feeding schedule - home made food Feed requirement chart Principles of feeding dog Energy requirement for dog Protein requirement for dog Fat requirement in the diet of dog Requirement of essential nutritive ingredients in ... Feeding management of newborn puppies Nutritional care of orphan puppies Feeding management during growing stage Feeding management during pregnancy and lactation Feeding management for adult maintenance PODCAST Quiz Topic 5 Topic 6 Topic 7 Topic 8 Topic 9 Topic 10 Topic 11 Topic 12 Topic 13 Topic 14 Topic 15 Topic 16 Topic 17 Topic 18 Topic 19 Topic 20 Topic 21 Topic 22 Topic 23 Topic 24 Topic 25 Topic 26 Topic 27 Topic 28 Topic 29 Topic 30 Topic 31 Topic 32 Topic 33 Topic 34 Topic 35 Topic 36 Courses You are currently using guest access (Log in)Pet animal Breeding and Management 

{article.name} Social Media Links facebook yelp instagram Search Skip Navigation Site Navigation Toggle navigation Home About About Events Locations Careers Services Blog Gallery Champion Pet Vet Savings Products Products Departments Contact Why Is My Dog Not Eating? Share this: Share on Facebook Pin on Pinterest Tweet on Twitter There can be many reasons why a dog’s appetite may change, but if your dog is not eating at all, a closer look at the animal’s diet and health may be necessary. By understanding why a dog may stop eating, you can be sure your canine companion is healthy and well-nourished with the proper diet for its needs. How a Dog’s Appetite Changes A dog’s appetite and eating habits will change throughout its life. Dogs eat differently based on their age, activity level, and overall health, and those changes are natural and no cause for concern. A hyperactive puppy, for example, will eat more to support its high energy level and ongoing growth, while a senior dog that doesn’t get frequent exercise will eat much less. Dogs eat more during pregnancy or while nursing, while mature dogs on a regular routine will generally have a more stable appetite. When a dog’s appetite changes abruptly or dramatically, however, it can be cause for concern. Why a Dog Might Stop Eating There are many reasons why a dog could stop eating, and a loss of appetite might be a symptom of different conditions. When your dog refuses to eat, consider… Mouth or Dental Injuries – If your dog has sore gums, has bitten its tongue, has a mouth wound, or may have dental problems such as loose or missing teeth, eating can be painful.Recent Vaccination – Appetite loss is a side effect of some vaccinations, but the dog’s appetite should return within a day or two.Medication – Similar to recent vaccinations, appetite loss can happen due to medications, especially if nausea may be a side effect of the treatment.New Surroundings – A nervous eater may lose its appetite if its feeding routine has changed, such as a new location due to a recent move or travel, new bowls, or other changes.Food Changes – Dogs develop taste preferences just as humans do, and a change in dog food formula or food composition can cause a picky eater to skip a meal.Bad Food – If a dog’s food has become stale or spoiled, some dogs will stop eating. Buying food in smaller bag sizes can ensure all the food is eaten before it becomes unpalatable.Stress – Just as stress affects a human’s appetite, it can affect a dog’s appetite. A change in living arrangements, family death, or shift in work schedule can all cause a dog to stop eating.Illness – Loss of appetite can be a symptom of many different illnesses and health conditions, such as cancer, kidney or liver problems, or poor intestinal health.Overfeeding – If a dog is getting too much to eat, it may stop eating occasionally just because it is overfull and not ready to eat again.Dirty Dishes – If the dog’s bowl is not washed thoroughly, residue from previous meals can taint the next meal and make it less appetizing. Similarly, the taste of soap residue can impact a meal.Manipulation – A dog that gets many treats might manipulate its owners at mealtime in the hopes of a tastier option, knowing that different food could be offered if it doesn’t eat. Encouraging Your Dog’s Appetite When your dog’s appetite changes, there are several ways to encourage better eating habits and more consistent mealtimes. Before making changes, however, consult with your veterinarian about possible health problems that may be the cause of the appetite loss, to be sure those conditions are properly diagnosed and treated if necessary. If there are no health problems affecting your dog’s appetite… Limit treats and snacks throughout the day so your dog is ready to eat at the proper mealtime.Increase the dog’s activity level and exercise for better overall health and a more consistent appetite.Establish a mealtime routine at the same time each day, using the same dishes and commands to help your dog understand it’s time to eat.Do not leave uneaten food out for the dog to nibble, but put away excess food after each mealtime has ended.Adjust the amount your dog gets at each meal to match its breed, weight, age, activity level, and nutritional needs to avoid overfeeding.Vary your dog’s diet somewhat to minimize picky eating and to help your dog adjust whenever the food composition may change.Add a splash of low sodium chicken or beef broth to dry food to make it more palatable and a bit softer for the dog to chew.Warm the dog’s food in the microwave briefly to make it more palatable and to encourage odors that will tempt the dog’s appetite.Take steps to minimize stress in the home so your dog feels more comfortable and at ease, which can improve the animal’s willingness to eat. Missing a meal or two is nothing to be concerned about, but if your dog does not return to its regular appetite, contact your veterinarian for assistance and recommendations. With care and attention to your dog’s nutritional needs, its appetite will return and mealtimes will become less stressful for you both. Comments Categories Click to View Blog Categories Horse Cattle Goats Swine Dogs Birds All in Birds Wild Birds & Squirrels Cats Small Animals Show Wildlife Poultry Seasonal & Home and Garden Pond Reptiles & Aquatics Large Animals All in Large Animals Foods Poultry Special Offers We are constantly adding new specials to our site. Be sure to check back often! View All Offers Company Events We currently do not have any events scheduled. View All Events Recent Blogs Does Your Dog Have a Flea Allergy? Fleas are a common annoyance to many dog owners, but these small pests can be a much bigger problem when a dog may be allergic to fleas. Recognizing if your... Finish reading Does Your Dog Have a Flea Allergy? Read All Blogs Skip Navigation Site Map Home About About Events Locations Careers Services Products Savings Blog Contact © 2023 Champion Feed & Pet Suppy. All rights reserved. Serving Delaware, OH View our accessibility statement Driven by New Media Retailer 

India TodayDailyONortheastMalayalamBusiness TodayBT BazaarWeb3CafeAaj TakLallantopBanglaGNTTViChowkReader’s DigestSports TakCrime TakAstro TakGamingHarper's BazaarBrides TodayCosmopolitanIshq FMAaj Tak CampusKisan TakIndia TodayDailyONortheastMalayalamBusiness TodayBT BazaarWeb3CafeAaj TakLallantopBanglaGNTTVLIVELive TVSearchSEARCHTRENDING TOPICSSIGN INDark ModeEdition ININUSHome TVLive TVProgrammes MagazineLatest EditionInsightIndiaWorldBusinessTechnologyEntertainmentShowbuzzBollywoodHollywoodOTTTelevisionKorean WaveLatest ReviewsLifestyleSportsVideosAllNewsMoFact Check Other NewsElectionsScienceEducationHealthIt's ViralLaw TodayAutoEnvironmentCitiesHoroscopesWeather SpecialsPodcastsSunday SpecialDIUInteractivesOpinionFollow Us On: NewsLifestyleHealthAre your food habits impacting your dog?Are your food habits impacting your dog?Feeding our dogs based on our own dietary preferences is leading to an increase in the incidence of lifestyle diseases such as diabetes in canines.Listen to StoryLive TVShareAdvertisementHarsha ChawlaUPDATED: Jun 15, 2010 17:20 ISTBet you didn't imagine that your dog's blood sugar was nearly as high as your own. Or that he would need insulin shots and a special diet to get it back into the normal range. India is clearly becoming the diabetes nation of the world for all its inhabitants, including its dogs. Vets say this has much to do with the lifestyle of their owners: small living spaces that don't allow movement, and overfeeding of the wrong kind of food. This is a worrying trend, especially since more and more urban Indians are acquiring dogs.According to Nagesh Mehrotra of Wisdom Pet Kindom, the popularity of pets has risen significantly. Today he sells 6 dogs a day, almost double the figure of 3-4 a decade ago. The social status of dogs certainly seems to have shot up along with that of their owner, and they enjoy the kind of lifestyle a common man in India could only just dream of."In cities, it's not just the people who have poor eating habits. Pets too fall under this influence as they are treated as family members. Dogs eat the way their owners eat, which is the prime reason they are unhealthy and obese," says Delhi- based veterinary expert Dr Pradeep Rana. But, is it fair or reasonable to impose our dietary and lifestyle choices on our pets? We find the answers by talking to veterinary experts and those with a passionate fondness for dogs.Different from humansDogs may be man's best friend but raising them as if they belong to the human species can be unhealthy and cut short their life span. According to a study done on the diets of 600 dead dogs by a Belgian acupuncturist, allergies and obesity reduce the life expectancy of dogs, which are an outcome of unhealthy diets such as junk food. Also, just like their humans, obesity in dogs can lead to the same afflictions such as diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, and joint pain. Another important readon't son why such diseases are on rise is overindulgence.Owners often confuse love with food and give their dogs too much food and too many snacks in proportion to the exercise they get. "Owners share a few morsels with their pets every time they eat thinking even the pet feels hunger the way humans do. So, sometimes it's not the lack of knowledge of the owner but their guilt which makes them overfeed their pets," says Dr Vipin Sharma. According to experts, dogs don't require more than two meals a day. And, too much snacking in between the meals is not just bad for their health but also spoils them.Though variety is a good thing, owners should avoid changing their dog's food on a daily basis. This is because their digestive tracts are much shorter and their systems can't handle too much change at one time. " Owners often readon't realise that the picky habits of their pets are an outcome of their extravagance. Changing your dogs' food on a regular basis is bad for their health as it upsets their stomach and also makes them indisciplined," says Dr Sharma.Understand your petThere is no diet fit for all kinds of dogs. Diets have to be customised depending on the size, weight, breed and age of the dog. "There is no ideal diet for dogs. Diets have to be designed according to the size and breed of a dog. For instance, when I had a Great Dane I would feed him meat. But I give a pure vegetarian diet to my Puggle, which is a toy dog. Essentially, every pet owner has to figure out a suitable diet for his pet as every dog is allergic to some food. My Puggle refuses to have milk so I feed him curd," says forty- year- old Anjali Gupta.Just like a child's needs differ from an adult, the nutritional requirements of puppies are different from those of dogs: they require about 30- 32 percent of protein whereas adults dogs require 22 percent of protein in their diet. This is because puppies grow faster. Similarly, the breeds which grow faster require more food than a slow growing breed. Where a German Shepherd and Pug are concerned, for example, the former would definitely require much more food than a Pug whose growing process is very slow. So, feeding a Pug large meals would not make it healthy but obese and lazy.There are also a few breeds which require just one meal a day. Also, according to vets the level of activity is an important factor in designing the right diet for your dog. If a dog doesn't have a fixed exercise routine, this means he will burn fewer calories. In such a case, the amount of fats should be reduced from the diet.Packaged or home-madeWith lot of fancy dog food in the market--holistic, kosher, high-fibre, gluten-free, high protein-many pet owners often think commercial dog food is far superior to homecooked food, which is not always true. Packaged dog food originated in countries where people didn't have time to cook for themselves, so cooking for pets was unimaginable for owners. It's the convenience factor which drives the dog food market. However, there are a growing number of people in western countries who are switching over to home cooked meals for their dogs after reports of tainted pet food, which explains why the sales of cookbooks for dogs and cats are booming.Controversies over pet food are also making news as experts say that they are not covered by the same labelling requirements as food for humans. For instance, according to a report in The Guardian, "EC permitted" additives covers a multitude of sins, including 4,000 chemicals and artificial colours banned for human consumption. "Meat and animal derivatives" can cover anything scraped off the slaughterhouse floor, while "derivatives of vegetable origin" is so broad as to include charcoal.However, according to doctors in the city, packaged food is often a good choice for people with busy lives. They believe this is better for pets than being fed milk and bread on a daily basis, which leads to nutritional deficiencies. However, doctors strictly recommend that dog owners educate themselves on the multiple varieties of commercial dog food.Dr Sharma recounts one of his clients who was disturbed about the increasing weight of his Pug. After a few consultations, the owner revealed to Dr Sharma that he was giving his Pug the same packaged food he was giving to his Saint Bernard, a large dog who weighs around 60 kg. " Packaged dog food should be bought after reading the labels carefully as they are divided into breeds or sizes," says Dr Sharma.According to Dr Sharma, home- cooked food does have certain advantages over packaged food. It's fresh and the owner can customise it based on his pet's taste. But here too, caution and discernment is called for. For instance, sharing your piping hot Chinese meal with its high levels for salt, garlic and onion can be toxic for dogs."When you tell people that you feed your dog home-cooked food they often think you don't want to spend on expensive packaged dog food. For many people home-cooked food means khichdi or daal chawal. Whereas making home- cooked meals requires extra efforts as you have to cook it separately," says Mrs Gupta. Dietary changes may be called forDogs, like human beings, need a change in their diet as they age, fall sick or when the season changes. Those with certain health conditions need a prescription diet that has different amounts of fat, protein and carbs. A dog with kidney problems, for example, can't be kept on a regular protein diet. In fact, a low protein diet is often advocated when a dog has any health problem related with a weak kidney-kidney failure, kidney disease, UTI or kidney stones.The purpose of limiting protein intake is to reduce the workload of the kidneys, which are responsible for removing toxins and waste from the body.Similarly, a dog's diet should be altered when the season changes. "As the temperature rises, dogs start eating less and their activity levels also go down. So, they shouldn't be fed a high- protein diet and instead should be given more fluids, carbohydrates, fruit and curd," says Dr R T Sharma. It's important to know what kind of food is best for your dog and what he is allergic to, and create a diet plan based on this information.Pets' day outGuess people aren't the only ones who need a break from sweltering heat. These days dogs too enjoy this luxury. Dogs' resorts offer everything a human would crave for while holidaying: large and serene green spaces, swimming pool, parlour, good food and friends. Gurgaon based Kennel1 offers a boarding facility for dogs when their owners are travelling or need a break. However, unlike resorts for people, accommodation is provided only after a meeting with the owner and pet to ensure that the latter is vaccinated, social and diseasefree . " Our priority is to give our canine guests an excellent service. So, we don't take more than 20 dogs at a time to avoid overcrowding," says Ashu Reuben, who opened Kennel1 five years ago. Kennel 1 also has trainers and a vet-on-call. Boarding charges for a day begin at Rs 275.Dog bytesDon't spoil your pet by feeding him with your hands. Inculcating such habits later creates trouble for owners when pets refuse to eat on their own.Dogs should be kept away from certain food items such as onion, garlic, chocolate, dry fruit, curry, salt and spices. Also, they should not be fed raw meat or egg.Don't feed leftovers to your pets as small portions add up to a big amount by the end of the day, leading to more calories.Food just a call awayMutton biryani, arabian goulash and aloo paneer sabzi are just a few of the lip- smacking items on the menu of a home-food delivery service for dogs. It's not just big food brands like Nestl, and Procter & Gamble that are cashing in on the extravagance of pet owners who want to give their dogs the best and don't mind spending on the fancy packaged foods made by these companies. A few enterprising people in India, too, are making a living out of dog food. Twenty-eight-year-old Abhishek Kapoor of Scooby Corporations started a daily delivery service of home-cooked dog food in 2007.With a customer base of 250 clients, Kapoor is optimistic about the growth of the business. "The food I deliver works out much cheaper than the branded commercial food. Moreover, I provide a good variety of fresh food which can be changed based on the dog's needs. We even cater to pets with health problems, " he says. Priced between Rs 1000 to Rs. 10, 000 per month depending on the menu, the premium service includes broccoli and celery and delivers meals twice a day at your doorstep. Such a service is also available in Mumbai and Bhopal.Veg or non-veg?Dogs suffer from nutritional deficiencies just like people do if they aren't fed properly.While there is no dispute about the need for a balanced diet, the issue of whether this should be vegetarian or not is a fuzzy one. Dog lover Anuradha Kakar is among the many who swear by a non- vegetarian diet for their dogs. "I feed my dogs a non- vegetarian diet since their bodies require it. Canines are carnivorous and need a highprotein diet to be healthy and active. Tofu and roti can't provide what a dog needs," she says. Clearly she is not alone. Owners of dog food services in Delhi and Mumbai say that over 90 percent of their customers order non- vegetarian food for their pets. They say that even though a chunk of customers are vegetarian themselves, they still order non- veg meals for their dogs. Mumbai-based Homecare Dogfood service owner Wasiff Khan is a proponent of non- veggie meals and often advises his vegetarian customers about the importance of non-veg diet for a dog. "Canines require a high protein diet which they can get only through non-vegetarian food," says Khan.On the other hand, there are many households in India that maintain their dogs on a vegetarian diet. Nirupama Sarma, who has had dogs in her home ever since since she was a child says, " Being a vegetarian family, we always fed our dogs vegetarian food, which doesn't mean dal and roti but a balanced veggie diet which includes porridge, millet and soya milk. All our dogs have been healthy, without a day of infection or allergy." A few doctors in the city agree with Sarma. According to Dr Sharma, dogs fed a vegetarian diet can be as healthy as those fed non- vegetarian food." Dogs' digestive systems are suited for some plant foods as well as flesh. So, go for a balanced veggie diet if you don't want to add portions of non- veg. If you feed your dog porridge, green vegetables, soya nuggets and other sources of starch, he will definitely stay fit,' says Dr Sharma.Just like pet owners, veterinary experts are also divided in their opinion. " Dogs need a high- protein diet and certain essential vitamins which are not found in vegetarian food such as Methionine, Arginine and Vitamin H," says Dr Pradeep Rana. Most experts agree that a mixture of veg and non- veg food provides the ideal nutrition. "An all-meat diet for a dog living in a tropical country like India can be unhealthy which is why a healthy mix is the best," says Dr Rana.advertisementEdited By: AtMigration Published On: Jun 15, 2010--- ENDS --- Watch Live TV AdvertisementAlso Watch6:21India cliches historic win at Asian Games 2023, touches tally of 100 medals0:37Watch: Hamas infiltrator uses motorised hang glider to enter Israel0:44Video: 68 rescued by ITBP jawans following flash floods in Sikkim0:07Video: Gun shots heard as Israeli police engage with Palestinian militantsAdvertisementRead This'We are at war': Israel's Netanyahu after Hamas' rocket attacks kill 200Actor Nushrratt Bharuccha stranded in Israel, her team says 'unable to connect'Air India cancels flight to and from Israel after Hamas attackHow Hamas’ biggest attack on Israel unfolded: Blow-by-blow accountHamas' fresh rocket attack on Israel as conflict escalatesAdvertisement Follow Us On: Advertisement PUBLICATIONS India Today Business Today India Today-Hindi TIME TELEVISION India Today TV Aaj Tak Good News Today EVENTS Agenda AajTak India Today Conclave Sahitya AajTak RADIO Ishq FM AajTak Radio GAMING India Today Gaming World Esports Cup USEFUL LINKS Press Release Sitemap News Newsletter Privacy Policy Correction Policy LMIL Documents PRINTING Thomson Press WELFARE Care Today DISTRIBUTION Rate Card SYNDICATIONS Headlines Today WEBSITES India Today India Today Malayalam India Today NE Business Today DailyO AajTak Lallantop Bangla GNTTV iChowk Reader’s Digest Cosmopolitan EDUCATION Vasant Valley Best Colleges Best Universities Download App ABOUT US CONTACT US TERMS AND CONDITIONS ARCHIVES Copyright © 2023 Living Media India Limited. For reprint rights: Syndications Today 

Close Search About Us Everyday Care Main Menu CareClub Know Your Pet Breed Information Press Center Main Menu Press Center Events Careers Shop Explore Shop Main Menu Explore Shop All Products All Products Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Dogs For Dogs Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets For Cats For Cats Arthritis & Pain Bone & Joint Support Pain Medication Supplements Therapeutic Diets Dental Care Chews Hygiene Therapeutic Diets Ear Care Prevention Treatment Eye Care Dry Eye Glaucoma Medication Flea & Tick Prevention Chews & Tablets Collars, Wipes & Sprays Topical Solutions Food Dry Therapeutic Diets Treats Wellness Food Wet Heartworm Prevention Chews & Tablets Topical Solutions Medications Allergy Support Antibiotics Anxiety Support Arthritis & Pain Dewormers Diabetes Care Endocrine Support Gastrointestinal Support Glaucoma Heart Care Respiratory Support Seizure Disorder Thyroid Support Urinary Tract & Kidney Support Skin Care Conditioners Leave-In Treatments Medications Shampoos Supplements Therapeutic Diets Supplements Behavior Support Bone & Joint Support GI Tract & Probiotics Heart Care Immune & Antioxidant Support Liver Care Skin & Coat Support UT, Bladder & Renal Supplies Medical Supplies Needles & Syringes Wound Care Urinary Care Medications Supplements Therapeutic Diets Find Care Welcome to Existing Account Already have a myVCA account? Log in 24/7 to access your pet’s health care information. Log In Now Activate Your Account Looking for a convenient way to access your pet’s health records, refill prescriptions, view upcoming appointments and more? Set up your myVCA account today. Activate Account Find Care myVCA Search Shopping Cart × Search Home Know Your Pet Feeding Times And Frequency For Cats Feeding Times and Frequency for Your Cat By Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Robin Downing, DVM, DAAPM, DACVSMR, CVPP, CRPP Print Article I've heard conflicting advice about feeding my cat - once a day, twice a day, just keep the bowl filled. What is a good feeding schedule for cats?Feeding your cat does not have to be mysterious. By recognizing a few key concepts and attributes of cats we can create a very reasonable feeding plan for them. Cats are creatures of habit. We can use this fact to our advantage by creating a regular feeding schedule and sticking to it. Feeding an adult cat at regular times provides the security and predictability of a routine. Meals become a cornerstone event of the day around which other activities are added. A feeding routine helps your cat cope when there are changes in the household (e.g., a child moves away to college, a new baby arrives, or a vacation during which a house-sitter is in charge). "A feeding routine helps a cat cope when there are changes in the household." A feeding routine makes a necessary food change easier. When your cat is used to eating at the same times each day, her body becomes conditioned to expect food at those times. Hunger can be a great motivator! If the stage is set for increased hunger followed by meals at regular times, then transitioning to a new food will often be seamless and straightforward. Cats have a simple stomach anatomy - just like humans. Because cats have a simple stomach structure, once the stomach is filled with food, it will empty within a few hours as food moves into the small intestine. After 8 - 10 hours, an empty stomach begins to send signals to the brain stimulating a hunger response. For this reason, at least two meals per day are best for your cat. Imagine if you only got to eat breakfast each day, and that was it! Regular, routine feeding times allow your cat's body to be prepared for the food it will receive. It is not recommended to keep the bowl filled and allow grazing. A break in eating habits can be a warning sign of illness. When cats eat on a regular schedule, that habit becomes strong. It is easy to see at a glance if all the food from a meal is consumed. If food is left, whether all or part of a meal, it is an important signal that something is wrong, and it is time to schedule a veterinary appointment. I was told that kittens should eat all they want; 3 or 4 times per day. Is this true?Feeding a kitten all it can eat at one time is called ‘ad libitum’ or ‘free choice’ feeding. This is not recommended as it can create juvenile obesity, encourage binge eating, as well as setting the stage for some orthopedic problems and diabetes. Over-eating at any one meal can also cause stomach discomfort and bloating causing slower digestion. Cats are acknowledged to have a genetically determined "set point" for their adult size. Slower, controlled growth in kittens optimizes body condition in adulthood. How many meals should my cat eat each day?The number of meals a cat eats per day depends completely on the family schedule. Cats should eat at least two meals each day, about 12 hours apart. But a breakfast, lunch, afternoon, dinner, and right before bed schedule is an equally great option. If more than 12 hours elapses between meals, the stomach can become hyperacidic causing nausea. My cat doesn’t finish her meal all at once. I think she prefers to graze. What should I do?Some cats really can regulate their food intake fairly well. It is still a good idea to create the expectation of mealtimes. This will help make it easier if another pet is added to your family at some point in the future. For grazers, simply measure out the entire day's portion of food in the morning and offer the bowl several times throughout the day. Choose regular times in order to create the routine we know is helpful. The important thing is to use a measured portion, either with a measuring cup or a kitchen scale, for the day. "The important thing is to use a measured portion for the day." Another consideration is the use of food toys. Many options exist from rolling food toys that just drop out a kibble of food intermittently to stationary food toys that require the cat to work for the food. See the handout “Feeding the Mind and Body: Interactive Feeders for Dogs and Cats” for more information on these types of feeders. Food toys are almost as entertaining for the people in your family as they are for your cat! Your veterinarian remains the best source of nutritional guidance for your cat, answering important questions such as the type of food to feed, how much to feed, and how frequently to feed. Feeding time can be an important bonding time. Creating routine and regular feeding times builds fun into everyday activities. Contributors: Ryan Llera, BSc, DVM; Robin Downing, DVM, DAAPM, DACVSMR, CVPP, CRPP Keywords Care & Wellness Nutrition Pet Services Find a Hospital Locate a hospital near you Learn more Related Articles VCA ANIMAL HOSPITALS About Us Contact Us Find a Hospital Location Directory Press Center Social Responsibility Career Opportunities Grow Your Hospital Sitemap Affiliate of Mars Inc. 2023 | © Copyright VCA Animal Hospitals all rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Web Accessibility | AdChoices | Cookie Notice | Cookie Settings | Your Privacy Choices 

Skip to main content The Ohio State University Help BuckeyeLink Map Find People Webmail Search Ohio State Indoor Pet Initiative Search form Search HomeAbout UsNewsEventsCalendarPast EventsPeopleFor VeterinariansLow-stress diet and feeding changes for catsMicrochip Fact SheetReferring a Behavior CaseImplementing Low-Stress Handling in Your PracticeBasic ConceptsTroubleshootingCanine Handling ToolsEnvironmental Enrichment Resources and ReferencesContinuing Education OpportunitiesFor Pet OwnersCatsBasic Indoor Cat NeedsA Purrfect StartInformed OwnersLitter BoxesScratchingResting AreasPerchesToysIdentifying Prey PreferenceMaking ChangesRefugeWhat is Feliway?FACT (Free Access Crate Training)Understanding CatsSleeping HabitsHiding InstinctSocial HabitsEating HabitsTerritoryGrooming and TemperatureCats PredatorsFeline Life StressorsBringing Cats IndoorsComings and GoingsEvents In and Around the HouseNew EnvironmentsNew PetsThe VeterinarianTraveling with Your CatProblem SolvingHow to Clean-Up Cat UrineSpraying and MarkingSeparation AnxietyConflict Between CatsIncreasing the ActivityPet IdentificationMicrochip Fact SheetOther ResourcesDogsPuppy Prep SchoolSocializationCrate TrainingHousetrainingGetting to Know My VeterinarianBasic MannersManaging Mouthy BehaviorsPuppy ClassesWarning Signs that Your Pup has a Behavior ProblemBasic NeedsEnvironmental EnrichmentProblem BehaviorsTraining MethodsNew AdditionsIntroducing Your Dog to Your New BabyIntroducing a New Dog to Your Current DogIntroducing Dogs and CatsChanges in Aging PetsSensory Decline in Aging PetsMusculoskeletal Changes in Older DogsCognitive Dysfunction Syndrome (CDS)Cats (Spanish)Que Necesitan los Gatos de InteriorUn Comienzo PurrfectoPropietarios InformadosCajas de Arena o LiteraRasguñar / ArañarÁrea de descansoRepisas o perchasJuguetesIdentifique la preferencia de juguete (presa) de su gatoComo Realizar CambiosQue es un area de Refugio?Que es Feliway?Entrenamiento con JaulaEl Inigualable FelinoHábitos de Sueño de los GatosInstinto de Huir o EsconderseHábitos SocialesHábitos AlimenticiosTerritorioLimpieza y TemperaturaPredadoresSituaciones estresantesExterior-InteriorBienvenidas y DespedidasEventosNuevos AmbientesNueva MascotaEl VeterinarioViajesSolución de problemasComo Limpiar Orina De GatoMarcaje UrinarioAnsiedad por separaciónConflicto Entre GatosIncremente la Actividad de su GatoManteniendo Sanos los Gatos de InteriorIdentificación de MascotasOtros EnlacesResourcesGivingMake an Appointment Eating Habits You are hereHome » For Pet Owners » Cats » Understanding Cats Cats are carnivores; they primarily eat small rodents, birds, and bugs. Because hunting is such a big part of a cat's life, even indoor cats want to engage in hunting types of activity. Keep this in mind when shopping for toys for your cat; most prefer those that resemble mice, birds, and bugs (identify your cat's "prey preference"). If you really want to make it realistic, make the toy move like it really is alive! (See more information about toys). CatsBasic Indoor Cat Needs Understanding CatsSleeping Habits Hiding Instinct Social Habits Eating Habits Territory Grooming and Temperature Cats Predators Feline Life Stressors Problem Solving Pet Identification Other Resources Dogs Cats (Spanish) College of Food Agriculture and Environmental Sciences © The Ohio State University The Indoor Pet Initiative 601 Vernon Tharp Street Columbus, OH 43210Contact Us If you have a disability and experience difficulty accessing this content, contact CVM-DigitalAccessibility@osu.edu Give Now Login College of Veterinary Medicine Veterinary Medical Center Ohio State University 

Menu Menu Royal Canin, Health Nutrition for Cats and Dogs Account Log in Create an account Forgot Password Select Language Search Search Start typing to search Close Scientific Practice Management Issues Vet Symposium Authors About Vet Focus Close Worldwide medical and scientific journal for animal health professionals SCIENTIFIC Back SCIENTIFIC View all scientific articles Dermatology Gastro intestinal tract Health management Urinary Vital support Weight management PRACTICE MANAGEMENT Back PRACTICE MANAGEMENT View all practice management articles ISSUES Back ISSUES All issues Regular issues Special practice management issues Special clinical issues VET SYMPOSIUM Back VET SYMPOSIUM Practice Management 2020 Scientific 2020 Practice Management 2019 Scientific 2019 AUTHORS Back AUTHORS ABOUT VET FOCUS Back ABOUT VET FOCUS Select Language Log in Create an account Download Acrobat Reader Home Scientific Feeding behavior in cats Home Scientific Feeding behavior in cats Issue number 28.3 Nutrition Feeding behavior in cats Published 12/12/2018 Written by Jon Bowen Also available in Français , Deutsch , Italiano , Español and ภาษาไทย We all need to eat to survive. But for humans, eating can be much more than a simple task to be undertaken on a daily basis; our mealtimes allow us to rest and relax, and perhaps catch up with friends or family as we enjoy our food. But from a cat’s point of view, eating is not quite the same, as Jon Bowen explains. Key Points In the wild, cats will eat – assuming free access to food – throughout a 24-hour period, with most feeding activity around dawn and dusk. Cats are strongly sensitive to the flavor of amino acids and nucleotides, and will show strong preferences or dislikes to certain tastes. Cats tend to follow fairly strict routines, and if the owner has an irregular lifestyle this can create a stressful and unpredictable routine for the cat. Owners tend to believe that offering food equates to caring for their cat, but they should also find other ways to show attention. Introduction Empathy is at the root of pet keeping; the sense of a shared emotional experience is not only the basis of the human-animal bond but also the origin of its key benefits for pet owners. A recent scientific statement from the American Heart Association noted that pet keeping was strongly associated with a range of cardiovascular health benefits, but these benefits were also linked to the quality of the bond and not merely due to the presence of a pet in the household 1. Although research in this area is limited, evidence is accumulating that pets with behavioral problems might adversely affect their owner’s lifestyle and wellbeing. For example, a study of dog owners found that both major behavior problems (such as aggression and separation anxiety) and minor problems (such as leash pulling and restlessness) can have a significant impact on lifestyle and satisfaction with pet ownership 2. The same kinds of owner-lifestyle impacts would be expected with cats that are unsociable, destructive, or show inappropriate toileting in the home. Figure 1. Offering food to a pet is a primary means of human expression of care. © Shutterstock Figure 1. Offering food to a pet is a primary means of human expression of care. © Shutterstock Pets provide both an opportunity for owners to receive emotional support from a non-judgmental individual, and to express caregiving behaviors in return. Being expressions of empathy, both giving and receiving care provides similar positive emotional benefits to people, with the offering of food being a primary means of human expression of care 3. So for some people, and especially for cat owners, offering food and seeing it eaten are important aspects of expressing care, and some individuals, who are out of the house for long periods each day – either with work or for other reasons – may regard feeding as the main point of contact with their pet ( Figure 1 ). This interaction works perfectly well for a pet species such as the dog, for which feeding is a social activity and meal frequency is flexible. Dogs adapt easily to having one, two or three meals a day, they show appreciation when offered food, and will usually accept restrictions on when and what they can eat. However, the hunting and feeding patterns of cats make it hard for them to adapt to, or show much appreciation for, human attempts to show care through the offering of food ( Figure 2 ). In fact, as we will see, the mismatch between the feeding motivations and behaviors of cats and people can lead to behavioral problems that damage owner lifestyle and the human-animal bond. What is normal hunting and feeding behavior? In the wild, and when given free access to food, cats will eat throughout a 24-hour period 4. Meal frequency can be as high as 20 times per day 5, although there does seem to be variation between cat breeds; for example, one small study in Bengal cats showed a higher average meal frequency than domestic shorthaired cats 6. Figure 2. The activity and feeding patterns of cats and humans differ significantly, as shown in this diagram. © Jon Bowen Figure 2. The activity and feeding patterns of cats and humans differ significantly, as shown in this diagram. © Jon Bowen For feral cats, meal frequency depends upon the availability of food and of hunting success, and therefore upon the availability of prey. Cats will regularly visit a set of hunting sites within their territory, focusing on times when their prey is likely to be active or easily caught. Typically, this means that cats most actively hunt at dawn and dusk, although they also hunt during the night when roosting birds may be more easily caught. Having a visual system that has evolved to work best in low-light conditions, cats also have difficulty coping with bright sunlight, which is why they may be less active during sunny days. Prey size is small, and includes both vertebrates and invertebrates 7, but since each catch is essentially a small pre-packaged meal which only provides energy for a few hours of activity, satiation plays a minimal role in regulating either hunting or feeding. Having eaten, a cat needs to quickly return to hunting in order to obtain its next meal. Cats do not normally eat large meals because of their limited stomach volume. Figure 3. When hunting, a cat will adopt a crouched body posture to make itself less visible before launching an opportunistic predatory strike. © Shutterstock Figure 3. When hunting, a cat will adopt a crouched body posture to make itself less visible before launching an opportunistic predatory strike. © Shutterstock At each hunting site, the cat searches for odors and signs of local disturbance which could indicate that prey has been recently active in the area. It will then go to a nearby spot from which it can launch an attack within the area where prey is most likely to arrive. The cat will then wait for a few tens of minutes before moving on to another site. Predatory behavior is also activated by highpitched sounds, and quick movements of prey-sized items; if these are detected the cat will stop moving, adopt a crouched body posture to make itself less visible, localize the prey, wait for it to approach (or move towards it cautiously) and then launch an opportunistic predatory strike ( Figure 3 ). When they occur, such strikes are rapid but brief, and are only over short distances of a few body lengths. Cats have poorer visual acuity at distances of less than 15-20 cm, so during the final phase of a predatory strike the cat depends on its whiskers and tactile sensation around the mouth. Once the cat has hold of the prey, bite pressure is under the control of local reflexes, so the cat will automatically bite down harder if the prey moves in its mouth. This is one reason why cat bites can be so painful for owners, and why it is important not to use hands and feet to entice cats to play. The predatory activity patterns of cats involve a lot of travel between hunting sites, foraging, and waiting. After catching its prey, the cat will take it back to its core territory where it can be eaten in private. For domestic cats, this may mean bringing prey home to eat, because this is a safer and more relaxing place to be; it is not that the prey is a “present” for the owner or a sign that the cat is dissatisfied with its food. It is also why some cats remove food from the bowl to eat it elsewhere; they want more privacy when they are eating. Owners should treat this as an indication that the food bowl is in the wrong place for the cat, or that it is frustrated by having to share a food bowl with other cats in the household. Free-ranging cats tend to locate their latrine, hunting and resting sites away from each other, so in the domestic home these may be too closely related, which also leads to cats not wanting to eat from the bowl they are given. Owners should therefore be encouraged to site feeding bowls and litter trays away from each other wherever possible. Jon Bowen The hunting and feeding patterns of cats make it hard for them to adapt to, or show much appreciation for, human attempts to show care through the offering of food. Jon Bowen Larger, more dangerous, prey may be dispatched immediately, using a kill bite that severs the cervical vertebral column. Carnassial teeth are then used to shear flesh from the carcass 4. If the cat is not hungry, and the prey is small, the cat may keep the prey alive for longer in order to practice predatory behavior with it. Cats will typically eat small mammals starting with the head and then moving onto the body and legs. They take time to chew the prey into digestible pieces and may not consume the whole animal; the aim is to refuel and then return to hunting and other behaviors. Less palatable parts of the body, such as the intestines, may not be eaten. If a cat catches a surplus of food, it may cache some of it by burying it in a patch of dry earth or leaves. This acts as a temporary food store for a few hours, and may explain why some domesticated cats perform “digging” behaviors around a food bowl after they have eaten. What tastes do cats like? Like other carnivores, cats have major areas of taste loss 8; for example, they are insensitive to fruity-sweet and salt tastes 9. They are more strongly sensitive to the flavor of amino acids and nucleotides; they tend to reject the taste of certain amino acids (such as l-tryptophan, which humans identify as bitter tasting) and are attracted to the taste of others (such as l-glycine). Owners sometimes comment that their cats are attracted to salty items like nuts or crisps, and sweet items like cakes or biscuits, but this is probably because of subtle amino acid flavors that we are not even aware of, because our perception of salt or sugar flavors is so overwhelming. Although cats taste food in a completely different way from us, this does not mean that human and feline preferences will not sometimes overlap! For example, cats will often reject bitter-tasting foods, as it is a means of avoiding the consumption of something that is potentially toxic 10. Initial food preferences develop as kittens observe and replicate their mother’s eating habits. However, this changes when cats become independent and are exposed to the range of foods available in the environment or provided by their owners. Some individual cats are regarded by their owner as being quite fussy about what they will eat. This can be due to limited early experience of different foods and flavors, leading to neophobia. However, cats also exhibit a “monotony effect” in their food selection 4; they experience a growing aversion to familiar foods (and also prey), which may lead to a preference for novelty and dietary diversity (within the range of foods and flavors that the cat is already familiar with). This monotony effect encourages the cat to maintain a nutritional balance by eating a wide range of food/prey, and is greater in freeranging cats than pets that have been reared on commercially prepared nutritionally complete diets 11. It probably explains the tendency for some pet cats to periodically lose interest in their regular diet, which then forces owners to try alternatives. What dictates feline behavior? Probably the most important aspect of feline hunting and feeding behavior, and indeed behavior in general, is that it is regulated primarily by environmental and internal factors, and not by social interaction. When a cat is within its territory, its behavioral patterns are not influenced by other cats; hunting, feeding, and self-maintenance (grooming, resting) are all solitary activities. Environmental cues, such as light level and vegetation type, provide information that enables the cat to predict when and where prey will be available. The decision to hunt is then dependent on the cat’s physical condition and the balance of competing internal motivational states (e.g., the motivation to self-maintain versus finding a mate or hunting for prey). Figure 4. A diagrammatic representation of the territory of a free-ranging cat. Such cats have large territories (up to 0.5-1.3 km in length and an overall area of 300,000-1,700,000 m²) with multiple hunting and latrine sites in the periphery, and places to eat, rest and groom in the core. For purposes of hygiene, latrines are located away from resting areas. © Jon Bowen Figure 4. A diagrammatic representation of the territory of a free-ranging cat. Such cats have large territories (up to 0.5-1.3 km in length and an overall area of 300,000-1,700,000 m²) with multiple hunting and latrine sites in the periphery, and places to eat, rest and groom in the core. For purposes of hygiene, latrines are located away from resting areas. © Jon Bowen Free-ranging cats tend to establish quite rigid personal temporal and spatial routines of hunting, feeding, territorial and self-maintenance behavior ( Figure 4 ). One reason for this is that, unlike dogs, cats do not have specific behavioral mechanisms for regulating conflict around shared resources. Instead, they use scent marks (e.g., urine and claw marks) and distance maintaining signals (e.g., threatening body postures, eye contact and vocalization) to keep apart from each other. Cats do voluntarily form colonies in areas where there is a surplus of shelter and food, but this still does not involve cooperation of the kind which can be seen in a group of dogs. Instead, it reflects the increased level of social tolerance that members of such groups possess; socially tolerant cats can coexist and take advantage of an area of increased prey and shelter availability, whilst • Cats eat up to 20 small meals each day • They eat throughout a 24-hour period. • Hunting and feeding are not social activities that are regulated by the presence of other cats. • Cats follow strict individual routines of hunting, feeding and self-maintenance. Box 1. A summary of feline eating behavior. socially intolerant cats would never choose to live in such groups. This combination of individualism and facultative sociability enables the feline species to inhabit a wide range of environments. A short summary of feline feeding behavior is given in Box 1 . How easily do cats adapt to domestic living? This article started by considering the idea that offering food is an important aspect of caregiving for people. All sorts of social conventions surround this in humans, and usually the recipient of the food is expected to somehow show that their needs have been met. In some cultures it is polite to leave a tiny amount of food at the edge of the plate, in order to show that one’s appetite has been more than satisfied. In others it is considered rude not to eat absolutely everything and then round off the meal with a loud belch. Either way, consumption is evidence of satisfaction, and dogs are usually more than happy to comply with this social norm. Cats, on the other hand, are more concerned with food as a refueling stop between other activities. Feeding has no social significance, and cats will often take only a couple of mouthfuls before walking away from the bowl. Owners can misinterpret this as dissatisfaction, and may feel obliged to offer increasingly attractive alternatives. In itself, this may not be a major issue, but in some instances it could lead to accidental over-feeding and can be frustrating for the owner. A more serious problem is the timing and frequency of meals. Putting out food for cats twice daily will only work if the food remains fresh and is available throughout a 24-hour period. Otherwise there will be periods when the cat has no access to food. Figure 5. In many homes food bowls are placed uncomfortably close to latrine and water sites, or where there is a lot of noise and activity. This can deter cats from feeding, especially if other cats are nearby. © Jon Bowen Figure 5. In many homes food bowls are placed uncomfortably close to latrine and water sites, or where there is a lot of noise and activity. This can deter cats from feeding, especially if other cats are nearby. © Jon Bowen Figure 6. This stationary tower requires a cat to move food down through various levels using its paws before it can eat the kibble. © Ingrid Johnson Figure 6. This stationary tower requires a cat to move food down through various levels using its paws before it can eat the kibble. © Ingrid Johnson Meal-fed cats will try to adapt to this pattern of feeding by consuming a much larger than normal amount of fresh food at each mealtime, which may be uncomfortable for them. The situation is worse in multi-cat households in which cats share food bowls, because this leads to cats queuing for food. To understand what this must be like, imagine that instead of having your own portion of breakfast, lunch and dinner every day, you were given one single massive meal randomly once or twice a week, shared with other people who were equally hungry and desperate to get their share of the food. Feeding on-demand is equally bad because the owner will be asleep or absent at key times when cats are at their most active and need to eat (e.g., at dawn and dusk). • Cats need free access to food so that they can eat small regular amounts throughout the day and night. • It is normal for cats to eat a small amount and then walk away from the bowl. • Feeding a single main foodstuff, with occasional small amounts of novel food items, is probably the most natural pattern for cats, and the relative monotony may help to reduce the risk of overconsumption. • Activity feeders help to provide mental stimulation, and should be used to prevent over-consumption in ad-lib fed cats. • Owners need to find other ways to show care, such as playing hunting games and talking to their cats! Box 2. Tips for better eating habits. Apart from an inappropriate feeding frequency, meal and on-demand feeding tether the cat’s routine to that of the owner. Given the fairly strict routines that cats follow, having an owner who gets up or arrives home at different times during the week can create a stressfully unpredictable routine for the cat. As a demonstration of how important this can be, at least two studies have investigated the importance of routine and predictability in the lives of cats. Both found that an irregular pattern of feeding, lighting, heating, cleaning and social contact led to an increase in stress-related behaviors. One study that looked at cats exposed to an unpredictable routine reported that the animals showed elevated urinary cortisol, reduced exploratory behavior, and increased arousal and hiding patterns 12. Another study found that a similarly disrupted routine led to a 60% increase in urination outside the litter box, and a near ten-fold increase in defecation outside the litter box 13. This is an important finding, because the deliberate variations in routine the cats experienced in these studies are very similar to what the average cat has to tolerate. Apart from varying food availability, cats often experience abrupt and unavoidable owner-generated changes in lighting, heating, the presence of stimulation, and human contact. When a cat starts defecating outside the litter tray, the owner will often look for a significant change or stressor that might be responsible; while many factors can be implicated, it may be the result of an overall lack of routine and predictability. Within this general lack of environmental predictability, feeding is probably the most critical aspect, as it is the area in which human and feline needs are the most incompatible. It is also the easiest thing to fix, and in many cases of inter-cat conflict and house-soiling the key to remedying the problem s to provide the cats with free access to food. It is also, however, important to consider the siting of the feeding area within the house ( Figure 5 ). Figure 7. Owners need to find other ways to show care, such as playing hunting games with their cat. © Shutterstock Figure 7. Owners need to find other ways to show care, such as playing hunting games with their cat. © Shutterstock Owners are often concerned about offering free access to food, as they assume this will lead to obesity in cats. In most cases this is not an issue, as long as access to food is through some kind of activity feeder or feeding toys that slows food consumption ( Figure 6 ), and the food is of sufficiently high-protein content. Cats appear to eat to satisfy a protein intake requirement, and as long as they consume their food slowly enough to allow them to reach satiation they tend not to over-consume. Although indoor cats are at greater risk of obesity because of a lack of activity, this is best tackled by providing a more stimulating environment, along with appropriate food control, rather than relying solely on dietary restriction. By providing free access to food using activity feeders, we can provide a more natural feeding experience for cats that will reduce stress and frustration. However, owners may not feel comfortable with this because it removes an opportunity for caregiving. One solution that satisfies both owner and cat is to provide food through “hunting games”. For example, playing a game with a fishing toy ( Figure 7 ) that starts with stalking the toy as it appears and disappears behind furniture, and gradually progresses through the hunting sequence until it ends with a hidden tasty treat. Owners will often assume that human values apply to their cats, especially when it comes to food and feeding, and the clinician should be able to advise on a few basic rules as to what to do (and what not to do), as shown in Box 2. Getting the balance right between the needs of the cat and the owner is not too difficult once owners understand the differences between animals and humans, and an appreciation of basic feline ethology can lead to better interaction between pet and owner, ultimately resulting in a more satisfying and complete human-animal bond. References Levine GN, Allen K, Braun LT, et al. Pet Ownership and Cardiovascular Risk; a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2013;127(23):2353-2363. Chan V, Fatjo J, Bowen J. The impact of the dog’s behavior profile on owner satisfaction and lifestyle. In Proceedings, IRSEA congress 2014. Hamburg ME, Finkenauer C, Schuengel C. Food for love: the role of food offering in empathic emotion regulation. Front Psychol 2014;5;32. Bradshaw JWS. The evolutionary basis for the feeding behavior of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus). J Nutr 2006;136(7 Suppl):1927S-1931S. Houpt KA. Ingestive behavior: food and water intake. In Domestic Animal Behavior, Ames, Iowa; Blackwell Publishing 2005;329-334. Horwitz D, Soulard Y, Junien-Castagna A. The feeding behavior of the cat. In: Encyclopedia of Feline Nutrition. Aimargues, Royal Canin; 2008;439-474. Fitzgerald BM. Diet of domestic cats and their impact on prey populations. In: Turner DC, Bateson P (eds.) The domestic cat: the biology of its behavior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1988;123-144. Jiang P, Josue J, Li X, et al. Major taste loss in carnivorous mammals. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2012;109(13);4956-4961. Xia L, Weihua L, Hong W, et al. Cats lack a sweet taste receptor. J Nutr 2006;136:1932S-1934S. Watson T. Palatability: feline food preferences. Vet Times 2011;41(21): 6-10. Church SC, Allen JA, Bradshaw JWS. Frequency-dependent food selection by domestic cats: a comparative study. Ethology 1996;102:495-509. Carlstead K, Brown J, Strawn W. Behavioral and physical correlates of stress in laboratory cats. App Anim Behav Sci 1993;38;143-158. Stella JL, Lord LK, Buffington CA. Sickness behaviors in response to unusual external events in healthy cats and cats with feline interstitial cystitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011;238;67-73. Facebook Twitter Linkedin Jon Bowen Jon Bowen Dr. Bowen graduated from the Royal Veterinary College in 1992 and spent several years in first opinion small animal practice. Read more Other articles in this issue Issue number 28.3 Published 12/12/2018 Breed and diet-based disease in dogs When faced with a dog that has a severe problem... By Giacomo Biagi Read article Issue number 28.3 Published 12/12/2018 The water requirements and drinking habits of cats Water is one of the most basic molecules in the universe... By Stefanie Handl and Julia Fritz Read article Issue number 28.3 Published 12/12/2018 Lewisburg pet health and nutrition center The more we know, the more we need to know… By Sally Perea Read article Issue number 28.3 Published 12/12/2018 Grain-free diets – good or bad? Fashions and fads come and go in all walks of life... By Maryanne Murphy and Angela Witzel Rollins Read article Log in Create an account Contact Select Language Back to top SCIENTIFIC All scientific articles Dermatology Gastro intestinal tract Health Management Urinary Vital support Weight Management PRACTICE MANAGEMENT All practice management articles ISSUES All issues Regular issues Special practice management issues Special clinical issues AUTHORS VET SYMPOSIUM Practice Management 2020 Scientific 2020 Practice Management 2019 Scientific 2019 ABOUT VET FOCUS Log inCreate an accountContact Select Language Back to top Close This PDF is exclusive to Vet Focus Members Signup to get access Create account Already registered? Log in Close Select Language Language Français Deutsch Italiano Polski Português Română Español English ภาษาไทย 한국어 Українська Русский Submit Cookie Settings 

🐱 LIMITED TIME OFFER: Get a trial box for just £8.00, with free carbon-neutral shipping! 🐱 ✖ Our Food How it Works Reviews Our Story Learn Support Login Try Now Nutrition Cat Breeds Our Food How it Works Reviews Our Story Support Login Try Now Liquid error (sections/article line 308): invalid url input 03.02.2022 Do you understand your cat’s eating habits? How to tell the good and the bad apart Everyone sharing their life with a kitty knows how bewildering feline eating habits can be! From their fussy antics to binge-eating, we’ve seen it all. Understanding your cat’s eating habits requires more than determining their taste preferences. Their diet and feeding schedule offer insight into various behavioural patterns. Cats are obligate carnivores who thrive on whole meat containing the requisite amounts of proteins, fats, and other essential micronutrients. The food you give them must complement their biological build. The more you stray away from the feline natural diet, the more they’re likely to develop unhealthy eating habits and related illnesses. We will guide you through the good and the bad of feline eating habits and present some helpful tips and tricks to set up a perfect meal plan for your cat. The evolution of a cat’s eating behaviour In a natural setting, cats are solitary predators hunting for food—rodents, bugs, and birds—several times a day. Being true carnivores, felines have a simpler and shorter digestive tract than herbivores and omnivores (who need to digest grass or complex carbohydrates). An average wild cat needs about 8–12 hours to process raw meat, which keeps them light and ready for their next hunt. The digestive mechanism of domesticated cats is the same. Their organs function optimally on highly digestible whole meat. Keep in mind that the eating behaviour of indoor cats differs from wild or outdoor cats in particular aspects: Factors Wild or outdoor cats Domesticated or indoor cats Quantity Have a higher caloric requirement due to their active lifestyle Eat about 70–80 calories per kilo of their body weight in a day Have a lower caloric requirement due to a somewhat sedentary lifestyle Eat about 40–45 calories per kilo of their body weight in a day Frequency Consume several meals in a day (about six to ten) by hunting small prey Have two to three meals (can be commercial or homemade) in a day, depending on their activity levels and body mass Adaptability Are highly adaptable to different kinds of meat due to their survival instincts (although the contaminants in raw meat reduce their lifespan) May have low adaptability to different food due to their compromised digestive system caused by inadequate nutrition Bad eating habits? Me? Never! I only follow my kitty instincts. They won’t mislead me, right? Or would they? Source: Anjie Qiu What influences a domestic cat’s eating habits? Domestic cats may eat whatever you feed them, so coming up with an adequate diet will result in healthy eating habits. An ideal meal for your feline should contain: Animal protein—All cats thrive on a high-protein diet consisting of lean meat. Proteins support cellular and muscular health in cats and meet their caloric needs. Animal protein is crucial as it contains vital amino acids like taurine and arginine that cats cannot synthesise. Consuming animal-based proteins helps cats feel full for longer, so your kitty won't be asking for snacks all the time Animal fat—Cats need some fat in their diet to regulate organ function and maintain skin and coat health. Animal fat also increases the palatability of food, which helps when your cat loses their appetite Vitamins and minerals—These micronutrients (cats get them from meat) have various functions like bolstering the immune system and strengthening the bones, joints, and teeth. Deficiency can lead to multiple health conditions Moisture—Lack of moisture in the feline diet can lead to several digestive and urinary tract diseases like constipation, IBS, and bladder stones If you’re wondering why carbs are not on the list, it’s because cats don’t need them. Cats can digest carbs in small quantities, but overconsumption would lead to feline obesity and diabetes mellitus. If your cat is suffering from a nutritional imbalance—like a protein deficiency or a carb overdose—it may affect: How much they eat How often they eat How they approach food Is your kitty eating in controlled portions? Most adult cats should eat two to three complete meals a day. The portions depend on their: Body size—Larger breeds like Main Coons and Ragdolls need more food than smaller breeds Activity levels—Active breeds like Siamese and Bengals generally need larger meals than laidback Persians and British Shorthairs Sterilisation status—Neutered or spayed cats tend to eat less than intact cats Pregnancy status—Queens need more food throughout the pregnancy and lactating period Both overeating and undereating are detrimental to your cat’s health. Let’s look into what these eating disorders entail: Overeating—Cats tend to overeat when they don’t get enough protein from their meals. It’s more common in cats on a dry food diet. Biscuits are highly processed, loaded with carbs, and usually contain less protein than wet food. Cats don’t get all the essential nutrients and eat more to compensate. Another problem is sugar. Manufacturers add it to make kibbles look glossy and appealing to the human eye, but sugar is known to cause addiction in cats even though they cannot taste sweet Undereating—A loss of appetite is accompanied by lethargy, weight loss, vomiting, and diarrhoea. Senior cats tend to refuse food if they have hyperthyroidism and late-stage diabetes. If your healthy cat isn’t eating as much, the reason could be repulsion towards the taste and texture of a specific product Get medical help if your cat is not eating for two days or more because it can lead to rapid multiorgan failure and death. Overeating is when you eat the cat food till your tummy’s about to explode, but your brain declares they’re not satisfied. How do we fix that, hooman? Source: Cats Coming What about the timing of the meals? Ideally, cats should have 8–12 hours between two meals. To develop the best feeding schedule, avoid the following mistakes: Free-feeding—The idea is to let your cat eat whenever they like by serving their daily ration at once. This method only works with dry food because it can stay plated longer than wet or semi-moist products. Since most vets do not recommend a dry food diet for cats, free-feeding is not the best solution, especially for felines who tend to binge eat Giving treats all the time—Snacks shouldn’t exceed five per cent of your cat’s daily food intake. It’s especially risky to give high-fat (and highly palatable) snacks like eggs, milk, and cheese to cats as they can create a calorie surplus in their diet, potentially leading to obesity and diabetes Pay attention to your cat’s behaviour while eating—how do they approach food? Once you get past the “how much” and “how often,” it's time to observe how your cat approaches food. Check out the details in the table below: Feline eating behaviour What it means Eating too fast Cats tend to eat quickly on a nutritionally deficient diet of tasteless fillers like grains and vegetables. It’s a psychological response similar to overeating. They try to compensate for the lack of essential nutrients by gorging Eating too slowly Felines eat slowly when they are stressed or have trouble ingesting food. This behaviour is common in cats with no teeth or older kitties Playing with food Cats playing football with their biscuits are bored out of their wits and could use some mentally stimulating games or human interaction Eating alone There’s nothing to worry about if your kitty likes to be left alone while eating. Their ancestral disposition as lone hunters makes them more comfortable with eating solo Hoarding food Cats have intense survival instincts, which can turn them into food hoarders. The behaviour is more common in kittens who grow up in a competitive environment, i.e., with siblings or other pets Regurgitating Regurgitating is your cat’s natural strategy to eliminate undigested food and ingested hair, usually in the form of hairballs or tubular vomit. If your cat regurgitates while eating, swapping their current food with high-quality wet food usually fixes the problem Low-quality meals lead to bad eating habits in cats Bad eating habits stem from an inadequate diet. With that in mind, avoid the following ingredients: Low-quality proteins—Cat food should contain more than 50% protein, preferably from whole meat. Although healthy for humans, the following fillers can do more harm than good to your furry companion: Vegetable proteins are hard to digest and don’t have the proper amino acid profile Meat derivatives are heavily processed slaughterhouse scraps with low bioavailability Dairy proteins are inadequate for cats because they contain lactose, which cats cannot metabolise properly Too many carbs, including grains, sugar, or starch, ruin the nutritional profile of many commercial products. Felines don’t need carbohydrates in their diet as they get their energy from protein. Cat food shouldn’t have more than three per cent of carbs Artificial additives, flavour enhancers and chemical preservatives because they are harsh on a cat’s stomach and may affect their health in the long run Besides getting nutritious cat food, stick to a strict feeding schedule to promote healthy eating habits and keep your kitty in excellent shape. Keep your cat’s eating habits in check with Untamed wet food loaded with whole meat proteins and antioxidants! Image (c) Untamed Change your cat’s eating habits with Untamed—here’s how! If you are looking for an easy way to develop or maintain healthy eating habits in your cat, try Untamed. We offer gravy and jelly products made with human-grade whole meat and organs, with twice as much protein than the industry average. All our products are free of sugar, grains, animal byproducts, and vegetable proteins that can potentially tamper with your cat’s normal eating behaviour. Our recipes positively impact your cat’s eating habits because we: Use natural ingredients—Our products are free from all known allergens and suitable for kitties with sensitive tummies. If you’re looking for hypoallergenic food tailored to the needs of cats with severe allergies, try our single-protein Chocka Chicken and Tuck-in Tuna meals Offer bioavailable nutrition—We ditch harsh processing and gently steam our food to preserve the nutritional value of the ingredients. Every Untamed meal is filled with taurine and vitamin E, essential for your cat's well-being Have the best-tasting food—The natural aroma of our food will entice your cat’s senses, so they'll look forward to every meal and feel satisfied in between We offer exquisite delicacies containing chicken, duck, ham, tuna, salmon, mackerel, sardine, and shrimp. Take our TRY NOW quiz to order a trial taster pack at a steal rate! Use Untamed to develop good eating habits in kittens Kittenhood is the best time to forge appropriate eating habits in felines. Once kitties are weaned off, they need food with high protein content to support brain and muscle development and healthy weight gain. Feeding them adult cat food loaded with coarse grains or other fillers can trigger diarrhoea and vomiting, which can be fatal for younglings. It’s also risky to introduce dry food as the sugar content in kibbles can cause addiction and lead to rejection of wet food in the future. If you’re looking for safe food for your kitten, choose Untamed! Our whole meat meals are excellent for growing kittens. With a regular feeding schedule and planned portions, they’ll develop good eating and pooing habits. If possessiveness is also a bad eating habit, deal with it. Because I’m not sharing my Untamed stash with anyone. Image (c) Untamed Worried about your adult or senior cat’s eating behaviour? We can help! If your adult or senior cat’s eating habits give you regular headaches, turn to Untamed. Here’s how it works: Managing food portions—Untamed comes in pre-portioned cans, and the food doesn't require defrosting or heating. Whether you have an obese cat on a diet or a senior cat who needs to gain weight, all you have to do is tweak the number of Untamed cans they eat in a day Preventing odd cravings—Food cravings come from nutritional deficiencies or bland-tasting food. With Untamed, your cat gets real meat, which makes them full and satisfied Optimising digestion—We speak from experience when we say a whole meat diet can optimise your cat’s digestion. Going Untamed means fewer gastrointestinal upsets or bowel problems. Since our food offers over 75% moisture, it also prevents dehydration and related kidney ailments Here’s what happy cat parents have to say about the Untamed effect: Timeline The Untamed effect Week 1 Digestion is optimised, leading to a less messy litter tray Week 8 Stabilised energy levels in your cat—no lethargy or hyperactivity—thanks to the suitable calories they get from lean whole meat proteins Week 16 Super-sleek coat and almost no annoying hairballs Week 24 and beyond Natural weight management and strengthened immune system for life Untamed delivers to your doorstep! Untamed offers a seamless onine cat food shopping experience and free home deliveries for all orders. Getting your taster pack is easy: Complete our TRY NOW quiz and tell us more about your cat Select a meal plan Place the order You will receive the goods within a day. If your cat approves our dishes, we will deliver a fresh batch of Untamed every month. Our cat food shipping is both regular and flexible–you can modify, cancel, or postpone the delivery anytime! We adhere to the best practices of ethical cat food production, and our operations leave a neutral carbon footprint. Our products always come in recyclable cans, and we get our meat from sustainable, cruelty-free sources. What snacks promote healthy eating habits in cats? If you want your cat to maintain healthy eating habits, stick to meat snacks. Give them contaminant-free raw meat or B.A.R.F. treats like freeze-dried pork or chicken. You can also prepare occasional soups or broths using leftover meat but with minimum seasoning to be served with wet or dry food or as a standalone snack. Here are some snacks that cats can eat occasionally, but in tiny portions only: Bread Rice Yoghurt Bacon Keep your guard up because cats are opportunistic eaters—they can get a hold of toxic food when you’re looking away! Source: cottonbro Be careful with fruits. Cats can handle bite-size pieces of specific fruits, like strawberries, bananas, and apples, but grapes and cherries are toxic to felines. Other potentially harmful snacks include chocolate, nuts (or peanut butter), onions, and raw yeast. Beyond food—unnatural eating habits of cats Some eating habits may be unrelated to food. Many cats develop a strange eating disorder, known as Pica Syndrome, urging them to crave and chew wool, plastic, cardboard, rubber, and even faeces! My hooman’s watch magically tastes delish every time I’m bored. Maybe I need kitty games to kill time? Source: Yury Kim Pica can lead to choking, poisoning, and internal injuries and blockages. While the exact cause of this disorder is unknown, feline behaviourists believe it stems from psychological issues like anxiety, boredom, territorial fear, or neglect. Particular cancers can also trigger Pica. Consult a vet immediately if your cat displays signs of this disorder. Recent Articles 03.05.22 What human food can Sphynx cats eat? [Comprehensive list] 02.05.22 Can cats eat peanuts? Let’s deshell the truth 01.05.22 Can cats eat sugar? A short and sweet analysis 30.04.22 Find out how much and what to feed a Bengal kitten 29.04.22 How to deal with Bengal cat food allergies 28.04.22 Help! My cat licks the gravy but leaves the meat 28.04.22 How to look after your deity with the right Sphynx cat food 27.04.22 A guide to buying the best Maine Coon food 27.04.22 Cats eating ice cream—they like it, but is it safe? 26.04.22 Can cats eat sausage? The facts you need to know! 26.04.22 The 3 hacks to know about British Shorthair kitten food 25.04.22 Exhaustion or comfort eating—why do cats eat more in winter? @untamedcatfood help@getuntamed.co.uk Our Story Our Food Support Reviews Nutrition Cat Breeds Terms & Conditions Terms Of Use Privacy Policy Cookies Policy 

Skip to main content Search: Go Search Filters: This Site Cornell Menu Search Cornell College of Veterinary Medicine Home Home Phone Numbers Routine and Emergency Care Companion Animal Hospital in Ithaca, NY for cats, dogs, exotics, and wildlife 607.253.3060 Directions Equine and Nemo Farm Animal Hospitals in Ithaca, NY for horses and farm animals 607.253.3100 Directions Cornell Ruffian Equine Specialists, on Long Island for every horse 516.488.4510 Directions Ambulatory and Production Medicine for service on farms within 30 miles of Ithaca, NY 607.253.3140 Directions Animal Health Diagnostic Center New York State Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory 607.253.3900 Directions General Information Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine Ithaca, New York 14853-6401 607.253.3000 Directions Questions? Email Us People Giving Emergencies COVID-19 In this section: About the Center Health Information Health Studies Professional Education Giving/Membership Lend A Paw News Cornell Feline Health Center Supporting Cat Health with Information and Health Studies. In this section: Feline Health Topics Aspergillosis Blastomycosis Coccidioidomycosis Common Cat Hazards Cornell Veterinary Experts Address Feline Nutrition Disaster Preparedness Grieving the Loss of Your Cat Histoplasmosis Hydration Respiratory Infections Safe toys and gifts CVM Departments, Centers and Institutes Cornell Feline Health Center Health Information Feline Health Topics Feeding Your Cat Suggested Articles How Often Should You Feed Your Cat? Choosing and Caring for Your New Cat Obesity Care of Obese Cats Anorexia Food Allergies Feline Diabetes To live a long, healthy life, your cat needs proper nutrition. Here are some things to consider when selecting an appropriate diet for your cat. Necessary Nutrients Cats are obligate carnivores, which means that they rely on nutrients found only in animal products. Cats evolved as hunters that consume prey that contains high amounts of protein, moderate amounts of fat, and a minimal amount of carbohydrates, and their diet still requires these general proportions today. Cats also require more than a dozen other nutrients, including vitamins, minerals, fatty acids, and amino acids. Although your cat needs certain amounts of each specific nutrient to be healthy, more is not always better. This is particularly true of vitamins and minerals, so the use of supplements is usually not necessary if you are feeding a balanced and complete diet. Supplements can be harmful to your cat, and they should never be given without a veterinarian’s approval. Cats should have access to clean, fresh water at all times. Types of Commercial Cat Food Commercial cat foods are formulated as dry, semimoist, and canned. These products differ in water content, protein level, caloric density, palatability, and digestibility. Dry Food Dry food contains between six and 10 percent water. Depending on the specific formulation, a mixture of ingredients are combined, extruded, and dried into bite-sized pieces. Ingredients may include: meat and/or meat byproducts poultry and/or poultry byproducts grain and/or grain byproducts fish meal fiber sources milk products vitamin and mineral supplements The pieces of dry food are often then coated with flavor enhancers, such as animal fat, to make the food more appetizing. Dry cat food is relatively inexpensive, and since it does not dry out, it offers owners the convenience of “free choice” feeding. However, dry food may be less palatable to a cat than moist or semi-moist food, and depending on the types and quality of the ingredients, may also be less digestible. If you do use dry food, it is important to store unused portions in a cool, dry location, and not to use the food after its expiration date. Owners often buy large amounts of dry food that can sometimes be stored for months, so checking the expiration date before feeding it to your cat is very important. Storing food for a long period of time decreases the activity and potency of many vitamins and increases the likelihood that fats will become rancid. It’s a good idea to store dry cat food in an airtight container to help prevent nutrient deterioration and maintain flavor. Semi-Moist Food Meat and meat byproducts are the primary ingredients of semi-moist food, which contains approximately 35 percent moisture. Other materials, including soybean meal, cereals, grain byproducts, and preservatives are added to make the final product. The cost of semi-moist food is generally mid-range. Semi-moist foods may be more appealing than dry cat food to some cats and can also be fed free choice. After the package is opened, however, the food can dry out, becoming less palatable and/or becoming rancid. Canned Food Canned cat food has a moisture content of at least 75 percent, making it a good dietary source of water. It is generally the most expensive type of cat food, but is also highly palatable for most cats. Many different varieties are available, which can be helpful if your cat is a finicky eater. Canned food has the longest shelf life when unopened, but any unused portion of opened canned cat food should be refrigerated to maintain quality and prevent spoilage. Gourmet canned cat foods generally feature meats, such as kidney or liver, and whole meat byproducts as primary ingredients. Some brands, however, may be nutritionally incomplete, and it is important to read the nutrition labels carefully on such specialty cat-food items to ensure that they have a nutritional guarantee. Choosing A Food Commercially prepared cat foods have been developed to give your cat the correct balance of nutrients and calories. Basic minimum nutritional requirements for cats have been established by the Feline Nutrition Expert (FNE) Subcommittee of the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), and manufacturers use these standards in producing cat foods. Reading the nutrition label on food packaging is the best way to compare cat foods. Pet food manufacturers are required to supply certain nutritional information on the package. Labeling regulations are established by the AAFCO and the United States Food and Drug Administration. All pet foods that carry an AAFCO-approved nutritional guarantee, often referred to as the“AAFCO statement,” are considered to be nutritionally complete and balanced. A cat’s nutritional requirements change through different stages of life. These stages include kittenhood, adulthood, pregnancy, and lactation. The nutritional claim on the cat food label should state the stage of a cat’s life cycle for which the food is complete and balanced, and that it meets the requirements of the AAFCO. Some cat foods are formulated for all life stages, which can simplify the selection process for owners with multiple cats of different ages. In choosing a cat food, it is also important to read the ingredients list. As with human foods, the items are listed in order of decreasing proportional weight. Look for foods in which meat, meat byproducts, or seafood are listed among the first few ingredients, as this indicates the food probably contains enough animal-source ingredients to supply essential amino acids and fatty acids. Once you have determined that a food is complete and balanced, choosing between the types of food may be a matter of what your cat prefers. Some cats like canned food, some like dry food, and some like a combination of the two. Choose the ones that work best for your cat. Homemade Diets Making your own cat food is a difficult and time-consuming process, as the recipe may not contain the right quantities and proportions of nutrients for your cat. It is generally recommended that cat owners purchase nutritionally balanced commercial foods, unless a veterinarian recommends a home-formulated recipe for medical purposes. In that event, your veterinarian will likely recommend a recipe developed by veterinarians certified in animal nutrition. Treats While giving your cat an occasional treat is not generally harmful, they are usually not a nutritionally complete and balanced source of nutrition and should only be fed occasionally. A good rule of thumb is not to let treats exceed 10 to 15 percent of a cat’s daily caloric intake. In addition, some foods should be avoided completely. Although raw meat is an excellent source of many nutrients, it is not recommended as a food or a treat for cats, because it is a potential vehicle for toxoplasmosis and other infectious diseases. Some cats that have consumed canned fish products meant for humans have developed potentially serious neurological disorders. Milk is not generally recommended as a treat for cats, as many cats are lactose-intolerant and can develop gastrointestinal problems if fed dairy products. Other Considerations Cats can be choosy about where they eat. Keep in mind that heavy-traffic areas, noise, the presence of other animals, dirty food containers, or nearby litter boxes can deter a cat from eating. Try to be sensitive to your cat’s eating behavior, and make necessary adjustments. Maintaining a healthy weight is another important consideration. Cats vary greatly in the amount of food they need to consume to ensure they don’t become over-or underweight. Obesity is the most common nutrition-related problem in cats, and makes cats susceptible to a number of health problems, including arthritis and diabetes. Ask your veterinarian to help you determine the ideal body weight for your cat and follow their suggestions for adjusting your cat’s diet to reach and maintain that weight (Figure 1). Although many cats are content to eat a single food, some cats may develop finicky eating habits and become very selective about what foods they’ll accept. Feeding your cat two or three different cat foods provides flavor variety, and may prevent your cat from developing an exclusive preference for a single food. A cat that refuses to eat can develop serious medical problems. This is true for sick cats that lack an appetite, for cats on a diet, and for the finicky cat that refuses to eat. A veterinarian should examine any cat that refuses to eat and is losing weight. Updated July 2017 Figure 1: Body Condition Score (BCS) BCS is a 5 or 9-point scale used to subjectively characterize body weight and muscle mass. Below are examples of BCS using a 9-point scale, with 5 being ideal. BCS 1: Ribs visible, no palpable fat, severe abdominal tuck, spine and pelvis bones palpable. BCS 5: Well proportioned, waist behind ribs, ribs palpable (slight fat covering), abdominal fat pad minimal. BCS 9: Ribs not palpable (heavy fat cover), heavy fat deposits (lower back, face, limbs), no waist, large abdominal fat pad. Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine Contact College Careers Follow us on: Privacy Site Feedback Accessibility Land Acknowledgement Site Map Intranet Cornell University ©2016 

Skip to main content Contact Us FAQ Shop Dogs By Age: Puppy Adult By Breed Size: Small Medium Large IAMS Dog Food Selector View All Dog Products Find Products to Match Your Dog's Needs IAMS Dog Food Selector View All Dog Products Featured dog product IAMS™ Proactive Health™ Adult Dog (0) Buy Now Shop Cats By Age: Kitten Adult By Health Needs: Hairball Indoor IAMS Cat Food Selector View All Cat Products Find Products to Match Your Cat's Needs IAMS Cat Food Selector View All Cat Products Featured cat product IAMS PROACTIVE HEALTH HEALTHY ADULT WITH CHICKEN (0) Buy Now Resources Dog Resources Dog Food Selector Dog Breed Selector Dog Articles Cat Resources Cat Food Selector Cat Articles Check Your C.A.T.S. View All Dog Resources View All Cat Resources View All Dog Resources View All Cat Resources Featured Content Coat Get Started Experts Talk Vet Articles Vet Profiles Free Voucher Signup Search Enter a keyword below to search for articles and products. Fulltext search Home Cat Guide On How To Take Care Of Your Cat Tips On How To Feed Your Cat adp_description_block75 Tips on How To Feed Your Cat Share Compared to humans, your cat needs a high-fat, high-protein diet along with other important nutrients. Cats usually eat many small meals throughout the day, so they easily adopt a free choice feeding schedule to maintain their normal body weight. Dry foods, such as IAMS™ PROACTIVE HEALTH™ Healthy Adult with Chicken, are best suited for free choice feeding because they stay fresh for a longer period. Nutritional Building Blocks Cats need nutrients from animal-based protein sources. Providing the vitamins, minerals, proteins, and other components found in a portion of complete and balanced pet food can help your cat live a long and healthy life. It is important to avoid supplementing your cat's diet, as doing so may lead to a variety of health problems. When selecting cat food, look for ones that offer the following nutrients: Animal protein from meat, poultry, fish, or egg sources to maintain strong muscular structure, vital organs, antibodies, and more. Taurine, an amino acid, found in meat sources such as chicken and fish, but not in plant proteins, to maintain healthy eyes, prevent heart disease. It also promotes healthy reproduction, fetal growth, and development. Essential vitamins and minerals such as vitamin A, which can be found pre-formed only in animal tissues, and vitamin E to help support the immune system. A precise balance of fatty acids to help promote excellent skin and coat health. A fiber source, such as beet pulp, that will help maintain your cat's digestive system health. Special Dietary Needs Pregnant or Lactating Cats A cat's energy intake should be increased gradually by up to 50% over her maintenance intake throughout its pregnancy. You can feed your pregnant cat wholesome kitten food to provide the needed nutritional support during the last few weeks of gestation. After birth, the mother cat's energy increases by 50% to 75% over normal in the first week to twice the normal in the second week, and up to three times during the third week. The third and fourth weeks are the most demanding because kittens are still feeding on the lactating cat’s milk and have not begun eating dry or canned food. Once kittens begin weaning, the mother cat should be feed normal food portions to avoid unnecessary weight gain. Avoiding Obesity ‘What do cats eat that result in them developing obesity’ is a commonly asked question by cat parents. Several factors are responsible for causing an unhealthy weight gain in your cat. Food and nutritional requirements of a cat are quite different than that of a kitten or even a senior cat. Simply increasing the amount of food your cat eats to satisfy its nutritional need could lead to cat obesity. And this is a health problem that should not be taken lightly. In general, indoor cats are at a higher risk of developing obesity because they do not engage in many physical activities. But as a cat parent, you must pay attention to your cat’s food intake and make sure it remains active. You may also introduce a new kind of diet that may help your cat to maintain its weight. Read further ahead for some useful cat feeding tips that can help you. same time, we recommend you control the amount of food you feed your cat. Even if it is a weight loss-based cat food, the quantity should be checked properly. Preventing Hairballs Cats spend a considerable amount of time grooming themselves. In the process, they end up swallowing their body hair. This leads to a hair build-up in the stomach. If the hairball doesn’t pass into the intestines, a cat may try to cough it up. A special diet can help decrease the likelihood of hairballs, but you may decrease its effectiveness if you combine it with other foods. Comparison of eating habits for underweight v/s overweight cat Underweight cats: Underweight cats need more nourishment, which will help them increase their body mass, eventually increasing their weight. For underweight cats, an intake of extra calories is also essential. These extra calories will help your cat gain healthy weight. You may contact your vet who can devise a proper weight gain chart for your cat. Overweight cats: Overweight cats need a calorie-restricted diet for them to come down to their healthy weight. In fact, the food you feed your overweight or obese cat should ideally have high protein and low calories. At the How much food should your cat eat daily? The amount to feed your cat depends on its age, size, and activity level. Feeding guidelines that recommend the daily amount of food you may feed your cat are included on all IAMS packages. Start feeding your cat the mentioned amount and adjust according to its needs. Remember to divide the portion accordingly if you feed more than once a day. With that said now, take a look at this table to know how much to feed your cat: Weight of cat (kg) G/day 3 45 4 55 5 60 6 70 7 80 8 90 How IAMS products help to solve over-eating/ under-eating issues? IAMS offers a high protein diet food for cats that are either underweight or overweight. The IAMS Indoor Weight and Hairball Care food is made with a formula that is suitable for cats who are either in need of increasing weight or decreasing it. The benefits of this cat diet plan are as follows: #1st Ingredient is Chicken. This formula includes L-Carnitine that helps get your cat achieve its ideal weight and has balanced nutrition. This food is recommended by Veterinarians as well. This cat diet plan also helps maintain your cat’s urinary tract health. Cat Eating Habits FAQs Should cats eat alone? There is no problem if your cat prefers to eat alone, as long as it finishes what you have put on its plate. Why is my cat hungry all the time? One of the reasons your cat is hungry all the time could be that it is not being fed the right food. Diseases like diabetes and hyperthyroidism can also make your cat feel hungry all the time. If you notice unusual symptoms in your cat, it is advisable to get it checked by a vet. What do you feed a cat that refuses to eat? If your cat refuses to eat, it might not just be because it is a finicky eater. It may also be experiencing health issues like kidney failure or infection in its intestines. Another reason for your cat rejecting food maybe furballs. Furballs are foreign obstacles that get stuck in the cat’s digestive tract, making it hard for your cat to eat food. So, if you notice your cat not eating food, it is advisable to consult the vet immediately. If you have ruled out health issues with the vet, then here are some tips on how to feed a cat: In controlled quantities, you may introduce canned tuna or liver in your cat’s food. This will lure your cat to eat what has been served on its plate. Try keeping its feeding bowl at different places to see what place your cat finds comfortable to eat at. Let your cat get hungry. Keep some hours distance between 2 meals as this break will make your cat hungry. Do not keep the food in your cat’s plate all the time. Only serve fresh food when it is time for your cat to eat. How do I know if my cat is hungry or begging? Here’s how you can know if your cat is hungry: If your cat is actually hungry it may meow and call you to feed it. It may also meow while eating. You cat will gobble down food very quickly when it is hungry. It may also steal food to satiate its hunger at odd times. If you feel that your cat is acting hungry even after feeding it the right amount daily food, it might be a greedy eater. Here are some tips to recognize a hungry cat: You should monitor the amount of times you are feeding your cat per day. It is advisable to keep an eye on how much human food your cat steals from your dining table to feed itself. If this happens several times a day, it is an indication that your cat is simply satisfying its temptations. We recommend you keep a tab on how many treats you are feeding your cat throughout the day. adp_related_article_block417 220 YOU MAY ALSO LIKE … adp_related_article_block417Tips for Feeding Your Adult Cat Read More adp_related_article_block417Comprehensive Guide to Feeding Senior Cats Read More adp_related_article_block417Why Ethoxyquin Is Important for Your Cat’s Health Read More adp_description_block20 Understanding Kitten Food Product Codes Share Understanding and learning how to decipher kitten food product codes will help you choose the right kitten food. While selecting the right ingredients is important, making sure those ingredients are fresh is just as vital to your young cat. Learn how to read the product codes of kitten food packages and cans with our handy guide. What Is a Product Code? A product code is a series of numbers and letters printed on the outer package of each product a manufacturer produces. This code provides information about when and where the kitten food was made. As part of the product code, IAMS™ products include a “Best Used By” date, or the date at which the product is no longer considered fresh and should no longer be sold. This date is expressed in “ddmmyy” and “ddmmmyy” formats. The second line of the product code represents company internal information for use in traceability and inventory control. Line 1: (ddmmyy) (ddmmmyy) Example: 040220 04FEB20 Line 2: 60351111## QQQQQQQ This product should be used before February 4, 2020. Depending on the production line, pouch products* may have code date information in a single or double line. By recognizing and understanding these codes, customers can make sure they are receiving a fresh product. What Is Shelf Life? Shelf life is the duration, measured in months, during which a properly stored kitten food product maintains its freshness. This means if a product has a 16-month shelf life, it is fresh for up to 16 months from the date of manufacture. The shelf life for IAMS dry kitten foods is 16 months. All canned formulas have a shelf life of 24 months. How to Properly Store Dry and Wet Kitten Food Unopened dry kitten food products are best stored off the floor in a cool, dry place. Open bags of kitten food should be stored in a clean, dry container with a tight seal. Dry kitten food products may also be frozen without loss of nutrients. Opened wet kitten food products are best kept refrigerated in tightly sealed containers for no more than three days after the container has been opened. Wet products should not be frozen in unopened cans. However, wet kitten foods can be frozen if removed from the container, packed in freezer containers and frozen immediately. *IAMS has no kitten pouch products at this time. adp_related_article_block128 474 YOUR --spice-- MAY ALSO LIKE … adp_related_article_block128Is Your Kitten Ready for Adult Cat Food? Read More adp_related_article_block128Understanding Nutrients and Common Pet Food Ingredients Read More adp_related_article_block128Healthy Skin and Coat for Your Cat Read More Load More Free Voucher Sign Up Click below and sign up to get a free discount voucher Get Voucher Get Voucher READ ABOUT OUR RESPONSE TO COVID-19 READ ABOUT OUR RESPONSE TO COVID-19 Have a question? Send us a message Select country Indonesia Malaysia Philippines Singapore Thailand Shop Dogs Dry Shop Cats Dry Resources Cat Content Dog Content Dog Breed Selector Experts Talk Vet Articles Vet Profiles Site Map Have a question? Send us a message Select country Opens a new window Indonesia Opens a new window Malaysia Opens a new window Philippines Opens a new window Singapore Opens a new window Thailand Opens a new window Cookies Settings × Opens a new window Opens a new window Opens a new window Opens a new window 

Skip Navigation Where To Buy Sign Up & Save For Dogs FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint For Cats FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Learn Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Bioactive Recipe Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Contact Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Skip Navigation For Dogs For Cats Learn Contact FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR DOG Shop by Age Puppy Food Adult (1-6) Dog Food Adult (7+) Dog Food Adult (11+) Dog Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Treats Common Health Conditions Digestive Weight Food & Environmental Sensitivities Urinary Kidney Joint FIND THE RIGHT FOOD FOR YOUR CAT Shop by Age Kitten Food Adult (1-6) Cat Food Adult (7+) Cat Food Adult (11+) Cat Food Shop by Brand Prescription Diet Science Diet Common Health Conditions Urinary Kidney Digestive Weight Skin & Food Sensitivities Our Brands Science Diet Prescription Diet Treats About Us Our Company Nutritional Philosophy Sustainability Ingredients Quality & Safety For Pet Parents Information for New Pet Parents Articles and Education Puppy Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Natural Disaster Support Shelter Partners Pet Adoption Resources Support Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Chat with Us Careers Media Press Releases Media Kit Where To Buy Sign Up & Save Home Cat Care: What's New? Behavior & Appearance Tips & Resources for Feeding Your Cat Tips & Resources for Feeding Your Cat tags Prescription Diet behavior-appearance nutrition-feeding Cat Healthy Advantage Published by min read Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Learn more about Hill’s commitment to sustainability Find food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Shop All Cat Food Find a dog food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Dog Food Find a cat food that fits your pet’s needs Shop All Cat Food Cats are solitary hunters and eaters. Among all cat species, only lions hunt and eat together. In a natural setting, cats will hunt and eat 10 or more small meals per day. One way to mimic this natural hunting behavior is to use a ‘foraging feeder’ or ‘food puzzle’ where your cat has to interact with the feeder to get small pieces of food You can also hide small amounts of dry Science Diet cat food around the house for your cat to seek out and eat, perhaps in shallow plastic containers or egg cartons. For people, eating is a social event, but because cats are solitary hunters, most would prefer to eat alone. This means when one cat in a home must be fed separately from the others, she is probably happier. Although they prefer to eat alone, healthy cats may not mind the presence of others at feeding time. However, in times of illness or stress, this tolerance may decrease. It is also important to know that the behaviors shown by your cat when you come home (e.g., meowing, rubbing on your legs, seeking attention) is a greeting behavior and is not a request for cat food. You should reward this behavior with attention such as petting or play, but feed your cat later. Temperature matters As a hunter, cats prefer food that is close to their own body temperature (about 101° F/ 38° C). If you are taking canned cat food from the refrigerator, it should be warmed in the microwave (and stirred well) or warmed by the addition of some hot water. Feeding behavior differences: Cat Dog Strict carnivore (must have animal source protein in their diet, but also able to use many nutrients from plants) Omnivore (diet of plant and animal sources) 10 or more small meals/day 1-3 larger meals/day Will hunt and eat at any time of day or night Hunt and eat during daylight No social value to eating Eating has social value 1-3 larger meals/day Mealtime is a special time for cats. Feeding not only satisfies a cat’s abundant energy needs, but also provides her with the right nutrients she needs to stay healthy and strong. Although some cats have the ability to regulate their food intake, others will overindulge or have difficulty eating around other cats. Simple guidelines for feeding your cat Feeding (food and water), sleeping/resting, and litter box areas should be separate from each other Ideally each cat should have its own food and water ‘station’, preferably in a quiet, low traffic place where your cat likes to spend time Water bowls should be wide and shallow; water should be fresh daily; some cats prefer to drink from a dripping faucet or a water fountain Many cats eat more readily from shallow bowls or plates so their whiskers don’t touch the sides Ideally, place food and water bowls separate from each other Food and water dishes should be kept clean Measure the cat food allotment for each cat according to the amount recommended by your veterinarian; monitor daily cat food intake and appetite Do you have multiple cats in your household? Learn about feeding multiple cats. Related Articles Related Products Related Articles The Changing Needs of a Kitten Becoming a Cat By one year old, your kitten will be an adult cat and she'll require an adult food, adult vaccinations and more exercise to keep her fit and healthy. Why Do Cats Eat Grass? Curious why your cat is eating grass? Discover the underlying reason, such as a digestive issue or anxiety, and learn if it's truly a problem. Cat Life Stages: Providing the Best Care for Your Cat at Any Age From the kitten stage to the geriatric cat stage, learn the six cat life stages and tips for providing the best care for your cat at any stage of her life. How to Tell if Your Cat has a Fever Ever wondered if your cat is under the weather? Learn how to check to see if she has a fever and what steps you can take to help her feel better. Related products Hill's Science Diet Adult Chicken Recipe Cat Food Supports healthy immune system, digestion, lean muscle & beautiful fur Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Ocean Fish Entrée Cat Food Precisely balanced nutrition with the delicious taste of savory minced ocean fish to help fuel the energy needs of cats during the prime of their life. Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Healthy Cuisine Roasted Chicken & Rice Medley Cat Food Delicious roasted chicken and rice in a mouthwatering sauce Buy Now » Hill's Science Diet Adult Savory Chicken Entrée Cat Food Delectable chunks with tender chicken smothered in a rich gravy. Buy Now » Our Brands Prescription Diet Science Diet Browse By Age For Dogs Puppy Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) For Cats Kitten Adult (1-6) Adult (7+) Education Cat Articles And Tips Dog Articles and Tips Nutritional Philosophy About Hill's Our Company Contact Hill's Frequently Asked Questions Careers Create or Manage a Business Account Community Support Food, Shelter & Love Program Shelter Partners Natural Disaster Support United States [English] (opens a modal dialog) FacebookTwitterPinterestInstagramYoutube Hillsvet.com Site Map Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Do Not Sell My Personal Information ©2021 Hill's Pet Nutrition, Inc. As used herein, denotes registered trademark status in the U.S. only; registration status in other geographies may be different. Your use of this site is subject to the terms of our Legal Statement. About our Ads. Cookie Consent Tool PLEASE SELECT YOUR PREFERRED LOCATION AND LANGUAGE Argentina Australia Austria - Österreich Беларусь Belgium - België Belgium - Belgique Belize Bolivia Brazil - Brasil България Canada (English) Canada (Français) Chile Colombia Costa Rica Croatia - Hrvatska Cyprus - English Cyprus - Greek Czech Republic - Česká Republika Denmark - Danmark Dominican Republic - República Dominicana Ecuador Eesti Finland - Suomi France - France Грузия Germany - Deutschland Greater China - Hong Kong SAR Greater China - Hong Kong SAR – (English) Greater China - Taiwan Greece - Ελλάδα Guatemala Honduras Magyarország India Indonesia Ireland ישראל Italy - Italia 日本 Latvia - Latvija Lietuva Malaysia (Bahasa) México Netherlands - Nederland New Zealand Nicaragua Norway - Norge Panamá Paraguay Peru Philippines (English) Poland - Polska Portugal Puerto Rico (English) Puerto Rico (Español) 대한민국 Republic of Singapore (English) România Russia - Россия Srbija Slovensko Slovenija South Africa Spain - España Sweden - Sverige Switzerland (Suisse) Switzerland (Schweiz) Svizzera Thailand - ไทย Turkey - Türkiye United Kingdom Ukraine - Україна United Arab Emirates (English) United States Uruguay Venezuela 

Skip to Main ContentOffersWhere To BuyCareersOpen in new windowNewsOpen in new windowContact UsDogsDogsDog FoodDry Dog FoodWet Dog FoodPuppy FoodSenior Dog FoodGrain Free Dog FoodPet Food FinderSee All Dog FoodDog TreatsDog BonesDog ChewsDog Dental ChewsDog Jerky & StripsRawhides & RollhidesDog SupplementsSee All Dog TreatsDog InformationDog ArticlesDog BreedsDog BrandsYour Pet. Our Passion. One App. Get more of what you love. Explore NowCatsCatsCat FoodDry Cat FoodWet Cat FoodKitten FoodSenior Cat FoodPet Food FinderSee All Cat FoodCat TreatsDry Cat TreatsWet Cat TreatsDental Cat TreatsCat Toppers & ComplementsCat SupplementsSee All Cat TreatsCat LitterClumping LitterLightweight LitterNon-Clumping LitterUnscented LitterAlternative LitterLitter Box SystemsLitter Box MonitorSee All Cat LitterCat InformationCat ArticlesCat BreedsCat BrandsYour Pet. Our Passion. One App. Get more of what you love. Explore NowWhy PurinaWhy PurinaNutritionOur IngredientsQuality Pet FoodNutrition PhilosophyResponsible SourcingTrace Your Pets FoodNo Artificial Flavors or PreservativesInnovationProduct InnovationCat Allergen ReductionHealthy Gut MicrobiomePassionShelterDog ShowsPurina InstituteOpen in new windowPurina FarmsPurple Leash ProjectOur StoriesPets At WorkAnimal WelfarePhilosophySustainabilityRecyclingPet Care PartnersPartners & Corporate GivingFAQsAbout PurinaYour Pet. Our Passion. One App. Get more of what you love. Explore NowmyPurina RewardsmyPurina RewardsREWARDSLearn About myPurina RewardsDownload AppOpen in new windowYour Pet. Our Passion. One App. Get more of what you love. Explore NowRebatesWhere to BuyCareersOpen in new windowNewsOpen in new windowContact UsProductsArticlesPagesBreedsCancelHomeDog & Cat Articles with Advice from Our ExpertsKitten ArticlesTips for Feeding KittensRead articles about:Kitten FeedingWhat Do Cats Like to Eat?Published: 5/23/2018Share this articleCats are obligate carnivores, meaning they’re meat eaters. They also like variety, so they may not be satisfied with eating the same dry kibble day after day. Fortunately, there are numerous options ranging from wet cat food to dry kibble to complements and toppers, so your cat can experience new flavors and textures. What Do Cats & Kittens Like to Eat? Kittens have different nutritional needs than adult cats. In the first few weeks of their lives, kittens are solely fed their mothers’ milk. They are gradually introduced to moistened solid food before transitioning to a complete and balanced kitten food. Like adult cats, kittens are adventurous eaters and will enjoy trying new things, so you can feed wet or dry food, or a combination of the two. Whether you’re feeding a cat or a kitten, “Cats need animal-based protein as part of their main diet,” explains Purina Nutritionist Karina Carbo-Johnson, MS. Some protein-rich foods cats like to eat include: A variety of fish, such as salmon, trout, tuna and whitefish Poultry like chicken, turkey and pheasant Beef In the wild, cats eat a variety of small prey, so mixing up the protein sources in your cat’s food can tap into their instincts and satisfy their cravings. What Can Cats Eat? Cats can eat a wide range of different foods, but they rely heavily on protein as an energy source. As a result, cat food is typically higher in protein but that doesn’t mean it doesn’t include other foods—or that they don’t need them. The non-protein ingredients included in cat foods are tasty and easily digested to support various aspects of their health. These may include: Rice Wheat flour Dried chicory root Oatmeal What Food Do Cats Like Besides Cat Food? Although we recommend sticking to a complete and balanced cat food and occasional treats, cats can eat some human foods. These include: Blueberries Cooked eggs Melon Although some cats may like berries and melon as a treat, it’s not because they’re sweet. Cats don’t have receptors on their tongues to taste sweetness. Instead, foods like these have a bitter flavor, like amino acids in protein, which cats find tasty. As with regular cat treats, these foods should not exceed more than 10 percent of your cat’s daily caloric intake. Can Cats Drink Milk? Unless your cat was raised on milk and has continued drinking it into adulthood, they shouldn’t drink milk—even as a treat. Without adequate lactase enzymes, milk can cause digestive upset. What Do Cats Love to Eat? Cats love interesting flavors and textures. They’re naturally adventurous eaters, which can mean they may try to eat things they shouldn’t. Raw or undercooked meat, fish and eggs are tempting to cats, but they pose a risk of foodborne illnesses or parasites and should be avoided. Keep meat and fish with bones out of reach. The bones can cause serious injury to a cat’s mouth, throat or intestines. What if a Cat is a Picky Eater? You may think your cat is a picky eater. In reality, they may be bored. You can satisfy your cat’s desire for variety by introducing new flavors and textures of food often. Figuring Out What Foods Your Cat Loves There are a lot of options when it comes to feeding your cat. You can choose from dry or wet cat food—or a mix of the two—and you can add broths, creamy toppers and more to spice things up. We can help you find the right food based on your cat’s unique nutritional needs and preferences. Our Pet Expertise page has more tips on cat nutrition and feeding from our experts. Related articlesHow Much Should I Feed My Kitten?Choosing the right food for your kitten is an important decision. Nutrition supports her growth, development and can even affect her behavior.When to Switch From Kitten Food to Cat FoodWeaning KittensContact UsInternational SitesSitemapNavigate to our Facebook pageNavigate to our Twitter pageNavigate to our YouTube pageNavigate to our Instagram pageTerms & ConditionsNotice at CollectionPrivacy Policy (Updated)Do Not Sell Or Share My Personal InformationAccessibilityTerms of SaleLinking PolicyCopyright Infringement NotificationUser Generated ContentAbout Our AdsSupply Chains Act 

518 45A Street 1.888.665.0856 Contact Us Print 0 - $0.00 CAD Your shopping cart is empty! Customer Login Retailer Login HomeDogsPuppy NutritionPuppy DevelopmentPuppy Feeding ChartsFeeding CalculatorDog Feeding BehaviorDog Pregnancy & LactationDog NutritionDog EvolutionCanine DesignDiet TransitionCatsCat EvolutionCat NutritionKitten NutritionPregnancy & LactationSample Menu For KittensFeeding CalculationsCat Feeding BehaviourDiet TransitionFeline DesignUsRetailersLocate A RetailerProductsEducational Videos and BooksWhole Animal Dinners (with 5% veg & fruit)Whole Animal DietsHealth Care / SupplementsRaw Meaty BonesSpecialty Diet OptionsPixiesLearnGeneralFAQsHistory of Dog FoodRaw or CookedThe Question of BacteriaWhat Is In Some Other Dog FoodsWhy Dogs Eat PoopWhat's In KibbleRaw DietIt’s not in the Bag!Feature ArticlesHealthDiabetesDog ParasitesHypothyroidismCarnivores & Liver Disease Pet ConstipationPet Emergency First AidSupplementsEFA SupplementationFeeding Pets For CancerFood Variety For PetsPet SupplementsContact Looking for our Supplements? Buy Supplements Here! Cat Feeding BehaviorThe feeding behaviors of cats in the wild reflect the species preference for animal tissues. Wild cats devour their entire prey, including muscles, organs, bones, offal, skin, viscera, etc. but often avoid consuming plant materials contained in the entrails. Domestic cats do not readily accept food served at temperature extremes. Food offered near body temperature is most preferred considering that in the wild, a cat’s diet is freshly killed prey with normal body temperature at the time of consumption. Young kittens begin to exhibit predatory behavior from the age of about six weeks. In the home, the queen may be seen bringing small pieces of meat or live prey to the nest box, making an unusual sound to attract her kittens’ attention. She may paw the meat towards the kittens or throw the prey into the air, pouncing on it as it lands. Live prey that is carried some distance is disoriented and easier to recapture or play with. The kittens may be fascinated with the game and join in or may appear rather worried at the entire process. Occasionally, a kitten will leap on the meat or prey and making threatening growls, gobble it down. Quite often the queen will start to play with the kittens but then eat the meal herself. At this stage of development, the kittens start to practice hunting; crouching in ambush, pouncing on one another and attacking each other from behind hiding places. The queen also encourages pouncing and grasping behavior by sitting quietly beside the nest and waving her tail from side to side to provide an irresistible target for the kittens’ inquisitive paws. Cats normally prefer to hunt alone and within the confines of their own territory, they will have favorite ambush and stalking places. Some cats roam long distances from home, to visit particular hunting grounds. Very occasionally cats from the same family learn to hunt together; each seeming to sense the others’ intentions as they work out strategic positions and cooperate in carefully timed attacks. When driven by hunger, a cat is more likely to scavenge than to hunt – it’s much easier to find scraps from a cooked chicken carcass than to hunt patiently for a mouse. On a full stomach, however, the most meticulously bred, endearing cat will still be a hobby hunter, impelled to stalk and capture. Feral cats are better hunters than domestic pets and nursing mothers are the best hunters. Studies of Swiss farm cats found that queens took on average just over a minute and a half to capture a rodent, catching something every third or fourth pounce, while non-mothers took almost three times as long and caught every twelfth pounce. The cat can hunt successfully in the twilight periods of dusk and dawn because it has excellent vision, even in poor light. The acute hearing enables the location of prey and the whiskers or vibrissae, and sensitive hairs at the ear tips allow the cat to feel its way through dense and entwined underbrush. The soft paw pads and retracted claws assist silent, speedy movement, while the powerful hindquarters provide propulsion whenever an attacking run or spring is required. The cat attacks in a swift bounding leap, and grasping its prey with extended claws, it holds it until a disabling bite is delivered. Hungry cats generally dispatch their prey quite quickly, usually with the efficient neck bite practiced during kitten hood. The well-fed cat, excited by the stalk, hunt, and capture, may play with the prey for some time before the kill is made. Even the most gentle of cats will hunt if given the chance, for, despite centuries of domestication, the cat still has a great drive to seek out and catch other small animals. Cats are opportunist hunters, taking what is available. Most prey upon land animals and reptiles, but some, learning from their mothers and their experiences, become adept at catching birds. There are local variations in cats’ prey; in the German study of cats’ stomach contents, the rural cats had eaten 14 different species of animals, while the urban cats had eaten only cat food and a single grasshopper. Prey also varies on a larger scale. North American cats eat mice, ground squirrels, flying squirrels, chipmunks, gophers, and robins. European cats hunt mice, voles, sparrows, and fledgling birds, taking shrews only when they are very hungry. In southern Sweden, males catch more rabbits than do smaller females. Kittens around the world and adults in the tropics eat spiders and insects. On subantarctic islands, noddies, terns, and penguins are consumed. In Australia, where cats were imported in order to control the introduced European rabbit, they will also eat opossums, reptiles, and ground-nesting birds. If the cat decides to eat large prey, such as a rabbit or hare, the entrails are devoured first. After a rest, the cat may then eat the entire carcass, even though it weighs almost as much as its own body, in which case it will likely fast for several days before hunting again. With smaller prey, the cat may eat the head first and then devour the rest of the body, including all fur or feathers and bone, regurgitating any undigested parts an hour or two later. Cats eating fresh prey regularly rarely drink because of the high fluid content of the carcasses. Pet cats fed only processed foods must always have access to fresh drinking water. Eating fresh prey also keeps the cat’s teeth and gums in good condition and the jaw muscles well exercised. The sporting aspect of predatory behavior may be most easily observed in a cat hunting prey across open ground when every ounce of its skill is required for even a chance of success. The cat first approaches as near to the prey as it can, using every conceivable means of cover. When it is within reasonable striking distance, the cat flattens its body to the ground and continues on a forward course, gliding over the ground with belly pressed to the earth, head outstretched on the fully extended neck and ears turned forward to catch every sound. The hips and shoulder blades provide the highest points of its stalking outline and these are kept level and low. When the cat senses that the time is right, it builds up momentum by swinging its hips and tail, and then, with a sudden burst of pent-up energy, the body shoots forward in a fast attack. Playing with disabled or dead prey allows the cat to practice its pouncing and trapping techniques. Highly aroused by such games, the cat may continue to toss the carcass around for an hour or so, diving and leaping upon it, patting it under objects and hooking it out again with extended claws, passing it under its own body to rake at it with the hind legs, ignoring the prey while licking a paw and then, as if seeing it for the first time, diving on it again with enthusiasm. Following some hunts, a cat may literally dance with delight, taking high, curving pantomime leaps. This is most common after dangerous prey, such as a rat, has been killed. Termed “overflow play”, this appears as a cathartic release from the tension of the hunt. Feral Menu With paws committed to killing and climbing, not digging or running, cats have a short attack range. To get close enough to attack, cats stalk their prey. The feline stalk – head, and body held low, intermittent fast approaches when the prey is not looking, the final sway and explosive leap – is almost universal. Once grappling with prey, cats kill efficiently, as any one-to-one assassin must. The faster the prey is disabled, the less likely the cat will sustain a crippling injury. The canine teeth of cats function as long, sharp daggers, stabbed into the prey’s neck. They are exactly the right width to avoid the vertebrae and wedge the gaps between them, prising apart the bones to sever the spinal cord. Indeed, “canine” teeth fit cat to prey as hand to glove. The canine daggers can feel their way to the killing spot, being well supplied with nerves. Combined with very rapid testing bites, this enables the cat to chart the correct path at lightening speed. The stabbing power to wield these dagger teeth necessitates bulging jaw muscles working on a short, compact muzzle. As a result, modern cats have no space left for several cheek teeth that once fitted into the longer muzzles of their ancestors. Wild cats are able to subdue prey almost as large as themselves and tend to avoid prey that is spiny, has shells, or has an offensive odor. Unlike most mammals, cats do not display a regular rhythm in sleep-wake patterns, activity, feeding and drinking. Cats typically eat 10 to 20 small meals throughout the day and night. This eating pattern probably reflects the evolutionary relationship of cats and their prey. Domestic cats are generally solitary hunters. Small rodents (voles and mice) make up 40% or more of the feral domestic cat diet; however, young rabbits and hares may compose a large portion of prey. A variety of other prey (birds, reptiles, frogs, and insects) are also taken, but in smaller amounts. The average mouse provides an estimated 8% of a feral cat’s daily energy requirement. Thus repeated cycles of hunting throughout the day and night are required to provide sufficient food for the average cat. Occasionally, cats eat grass in order to clear their stomach of indigestible food, like bones, fur, and feathers. The feeding behaviors of cats in the wild reflect the species preference for animal tissues. Wild cats devour their entire prey, including muscles, organs, bones, offal, skin, viscera, etc. but often avoid consuming plant materials contained in the entrails. African lions have been observed to first empty the ingesta from the entrails by expressing the contents with their tongue. Feeding temperature also influences food acceptance by cats. Domestic cats do not readily accept food served at temperature extremes, whereas food offered near body temperature (38.5 degrees C) is most preferred. This is logical considering that in the wild, a cat’s diet is freshly killed prey with normal body temperature at the time of consumption. Among the largest and most powerful of the cat family, lions have developed effective strategies for survival. They are the only cats that regularly work together to make a kill and share the spoils more or less democratically. Like most carnivores, lions work hard for their food and bring down large animals, such as zebras and antelopes, which are their usual prey. They also take giraffe and smaller animals and will eat carrion. As soon as the prey is dead, a single lion will often drag its catch to a secluded spot. The abdomen is opened, and the meal usually starts with the entrails, favoring organs such as the heart, liver, and kidneys. Some lions will often then bury the stomach and intestines, but frequently just make an attempt at doing this. Why they do this is unknown. Other lions will eat everything in the body cavity except the stomach, showing a strong preference for the intestines. The meal then proceeds with the hindquarters, which is the fleshiest part of the animal. The lions will then work forward towards the head. It is also unusual for lions to open the skull. Individuals in a group of lions feeding will go for whatever they can get their teeth into, with the strongest individuals getting the best morsels. If the pride male is present, he will often (but not always) keep the kill for himself, until he is sated. The females eat next, and then, the cubs. In some locales, the males prefer the flesh and will start eating the hindquarters of a fresh kill while the females fight over the entrails. Lions are scavengers, too. They will eat almost anything they find dead. For many old lions too old to run down live game, scavenging may be their only way to find food. Although tigers hunt alone, a kill may be shared by several adults. Prey living in dense, forested areas, where tigers are found, tend to be more scattered in distribution. Prey consists of whatever unwary or vulnerable creature happens to stray across their path including deer and wild boar. Deer species may include sambar, chital, sika deer, swamp deer, and hog deer, among others. Depending on the habitat, tigers may also eat antelope, buffalo, guar, domestic livestock, peafowl, monkeys, civets, porcupines, fish, frogs, crabs, large monitor lizards, pythons, and young elephants or rhinos. Grass, fruits, and berries are also eaten. Tigers kill animals of all ages and physical conditions, including animals in their prime. Because of their size and build, tigers can kill prey large enough to provide meals for several days. Tigers can consume 20 to 35 kg (44-77 lb.) of food at a meal; but they usually eat about 15 to 18 kg (33-40 lb.) of food a day, over several days. Leopards are stealthy and solitary hunters, sometimes stalking prey over very long distances. Leopards prey on anything from the size of a mouse to a mammal twice their weight - including wildebeest, gazelle, deer and young giraffes and small prey, such as monkeys, and mice. Certain prey may be disemboweled and the entrails buried, and birds will usually be carefully plucked before eating. Leopards seem to dislike fur and feathers and rid them by shaking their head vigorously. Leopards often kill more than they require immediately, and hide their kill either in a tree or a hole, returning later to finish it. Jaguars are good climbers, but they are thought to hunt mainly on the ground. These solitary hunters will feed on almost anything that’s available, including lizards, snakes, capybara, caiman, small mammals, deer, fish, turtles, and cattle. The jaguar’s strong jaws and robust canine teeth enable it to kill livestock weighing three to four times its own weight, often with a lethal bite to the back of the skull rather than seizing the neck or throat as many other large cats do. The main diet of the Puma consists of deer. Other prey includes beavers, porcupines, hares, raccoons, opossums, elk and feral hogs. The kill is often dragged to a secluded spot and, after the cat has eaten its fill, it may cover the carcass with vegetation. Large prey can provide enough food for a week or more. Cheetahs hunt by daylight, often in the late morning and early evening when competition is less keen. They take animals such as gazelles, impalas, wildebeest calves and hares, stalking their quarry until close enough to make a sudden dash and then pursuing them in a short and dramatic high-speed chase. There are five species within the genus Lynx; the Caracal, Bobcat, the North American Lynx, the Eurasian Lynx and the Spanish Lynx. The diet of Lynxes varies with the region they inhabit, however, their food choices are similar, consisting of birds, rodents, rabbits and hares, caribou calves, ducks and fallow deer fawns. Servals and Ocelots are both medium-sized cats with very different evolutionary histories and although they live on different continents, they both make their living catching essentially the same kind of food – small rodents. The Serval is a highly specialized rodent catcher and almost exclusively a ground hunter. Although rodents are the preferred food, it will also eat frogs, lizards, mole rats, small birds, and insects. The Ocelot is largely nocturnal and hunts in dense forest cover. Prey chiefly comprises rodents and other small mammals, but they sometimes take animals as large as an agouti or catch birds, fish, snakes, lizards and land crabs. Our chief scientist Mother Nature is pleased to offer you some of her finest work. The information on this website is not intended to replace Veterinary medical advice. Carnivora™ 518 45A Street 1.888.665.0856 Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Search Site Map © 2023 Carnivora™. All Rights Reserved. Home Dogs Puppy Nutrition Puppy Development Puppy Feeding Charts Feeding Calculator Dog Feeding Behavior Dog Pregnancy & Lactation Dog Nutrition Dog Evolution Canine Design Diet Transition Cats Cat Evolution Cat Nutrition Kitten Nutrition Pregnancy & Lactation Sample Menu For Kittens Feeding Calculations Cat Feeding Behaviour Diet Transition Feline Design Us Retailers Locate A Retailer Products Educational Videos and Books Whole Animal Dinners (with 5% veg & fruit) Whole Animal Diets Health Care / Supplements Raw Meaty Bones Specialty Diet Options Pixies LearnGeneral FAQs History of Dog Food Raw or Cooked The Question of Bacteria What Is In Some Other Dog Foods Why Dogs Eat Poop What's In Kibble Raw Diet It’s not in the Bag! Feature ArticlesHealth Diabetes Dog Parasites Hypothyroidism Carnivores & Liver Disease Pet Constipation Pet Emergency First AidSupplements EFA Supplementation Feeding Pets For Cancer Food Variety For Pets Pet Supplements Contact 

For DogsNewProductsBreed + Health Dog DNA TestMerchandiseDog LibraryDog BreedsDog DiseasesSoonDog TraitsSoonFor CatsProductsBreed + Health Cat DNA TestOral Health Test for CatsWhole Genome TestCompare ProductsMerchandiseCat Library Cat BreedsCat DiseasesSoonCat TraitsSoonLearnPet HealthOur ScienceOur ResearchFor VeterinariansResourcesBlogCat InsiderDog InsiderNewAboutOur CompanyOur Team UpdatesBasepaws GivesSupportHelp CenterContact UsRegister KitSign UpblogFeline Feeding HabitsShareTagsCat BehaviorFeline Feeding HabitsCats prefer small frequent meals throughout the day, eating as many as 10-12 times a day. Cats also prefer to hunt and feeding to this instinct can be very important to enrichment for your cat.This preference for small frequent meals is not conducive to most lifestyles of pet owners and can lead to free-feeding cats. While it is up to each particular owner and their lifestyle to determine the best means for feeding their cat, there are other ways to provide small frequent meals to cats other than free feeding. One primary argument against free feeding cats is that cats may overeat and suffer from obesity due to the overeating when resources are available without the physical activity of hunting. There are many fun and creative ways to combat this, including puzzle feeders, timed feeders, and food dispensing feeders. These means of feeding can control small portions over time and play to the cats' natural hunting instinct. These feeders can be homemade or manufactured depending on resources, but allow for better evaluation and control of calorie intake than free feeding. When using puzzles, toys, or eggs, provide the new food resource near the current resource to allow acclimation and understanding of the new resource provision. Depending on how quickly your cat takes to the feeders, you can move them further from their current food source. Moving these toys on elevated surfaces can increase movement and activity when your cat is hunting for food. This activity stimulates them physically and mentally, and this is important to the overall enrichment and quality of life for your cat. Don't worry if you can't invest in expensive toys! There are lots of great ideas online for DIY interactive feeders and toys for your cat! Make sure you supervise all activity with feeders and toys to ensure your cat is safe during play and use.Each owner needs to decide what feeding style works best for them personally, or what combination of techniques will best fit their lifestyle. Working in as many ways to appeal to their cat's natural hunting and prey drive is an essential way to provide their cat with the activity and mental stimulation they need. This increased movement and feeding cycle can help many cats lose weight and maintain a healthy body condition as well.Regardless of the method you choose, ensure you know how much your cat is eating and ensure caloric needs are being met, but not exceeded. Meeting, but not exceeding caloric needs can pose a challenge for multi-cat households. These cat owners may want to consider using feeders that recognize chips on the collar and can aid in tracking how much each cat is eating. This is not quite as easy with feeders, but regulated amounts can be put in toys and monitored while cats play. Multi-cat households may also benefit from the combination of feeding techniques to monitor food intake minimums and monitor body condition and weight of each cat to ensure they are not taking more than their share of the resources.Keep in mind that each cat is different, and they, therefore, have different feeding habits. Some cats are social feeders, and they will wait until there are family members present to eat. Other cats prefer to eat their portions whenever possible. If your cat is not eating, spend some time sitting near or around their food source to see if they are more inclined to eat when you are present. Conversely, other cats may prefer to eat when there are no other perceived competitors present. Observing your cats' preferences is the best way to establish their eating norms and behaviors most natural to them as well as to observe changes in these behaviors and any concerns in feeding changes. An important factor in cat health is hydration, which we have not discussed yet. Cats are physiologically not as inclined to respond to the sensation of thirst, which is why it is often advised to include canned food in their diet. As previously discussed, canned food has a higher water content than dry food, which can help increase water intake. However, we must also assess external factors influencing water intake in cats. Many people note their cats seem to enjoy drinking from the faucet. Cats often are drawn to drinking from running or moving water sources, and this makes cat fountains an excellent choice for some cats. These fountains recycle the water, preventing waste, and providing fresh running water for your cat. Remember, cats do not like their whiskers to touch the side of their bowl, and this will inhibit them from consuming as much water and even food. Provide water (and food) bowls that allow for their mouth to reach the bottom without their whiskers touching the sides.Receive exclusive discounts, product sneak peeks, and latest news.There was an error processing your subscription, please try again.Thanks for subscribing! Your email was successfully registered.FeaturedBreed + Health Dog DNA TestBreed + Health Cat DNA TestOral Health Test for CatsWhole Genome TestMerchandisePet HealthOur ScienceOur ResearchFor VeterinariansAbout UsOur Team Basepaws GivesHelp CenterContact UsRefer a FriendInformationBlogCat Insider Cat BreedsDog BreedsDog InsiderTerms of ServicePrivacy PolicyAll trademarks are the property of Basepaws Inc. or a related company or a licensor unless otherwise noted. ©2022 Basepaws Inc. All Rights Reserved.The animal health information contained herein is provided for educational purposes only and is not intended to replace discussions with an animal healthcare professional. All decisions regarding the care of a veterinary patient must be made with an animal healthcare professional, considering the unique characteristics of the patient.Back to Our Team 

